SECTION 22 05 29 - HANGERS AND SUPPORTS FOR PLUMBING PIPING AND EQUIPMENT

GENERAL

RELATED DOCUMENTS

Drawings and general provisions of the Contract, including General and Supplementary Conditions and Division 01 Specification Sections, apply to this Section.

SUMMARY

Section Includes:

Metal pipe hangers and supports.

Trapeze pipe hangers.

Thermal-hanger shield inserts.

Fastener systems.

Related Sections:

Section 055000 "Metal Fabrications" for structural-steel shapes and plates for trapeze hangers for pipe and equipment supports.

DEFINITIONS

Retain definitions remaining after this Section has been edited.

MSS:  Manufacturers Standardization Society of The Valve and Fittings Industry Inc.

PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS

Structural Performance:  Hangers and supports for plumbing piping and equipment shall withstand the effects of gravity loads and stresses within limits and under conditions indicated according to ASCE/SEI 7.

Design supports for multiple pipes, including pipe stands, capable of supporting combined weight of supported systems, system contents, and test water.

Design equipment supports capable of supporting combined operating weight of supported equipment and connected systems and components.

Design seismic-restraint hangers and supports for piping and equipment and obtain approval from authorities having jurisdiction.

WORK INCLUDED

Furnish all labor, materials, services, testing, transportation and equipment necessary for the completion of all plumbing work as indicated on drawings and specified herein. Work materials and equipment not indicated or specified which is necessary for the complete and proper operation of the work of this Section in accordance with the true intent and meaning of the contract documents shall be provided and incorporated at no additional cost to the Owner.

QUALITY ASSURANCE

Code Requirements: All work covered by this Section shall conform to the latest requirements of the following regulations:

C.C.R., Title 24, Part 5 (2022 CPC).

2022 California Plumbing Code.

SMACNA Seismic Restraint Manual Guidelines for Mechanical Systems.

National Fire Protection Association.

California State Division of Industrial Safety.

County Health Department.

Any other legally constituted body-having jurisdiction thereof.

Nothing in the specifications or drawings shall be construed to permit deviation from the requirements of governing codes unless approval for said deviation has been obtained from the legally constituted authorities having jurisdiction and from the Owner's representative.

DRAWINGS

Because of the small-scale drawings, it is not possible to indicate all offsets, fittings and accessories which may be required. The Contractor shall carefully investigate the conditions surrounding installation of his work, furnishing the necessary piping, fittings, valves, traps, and other devices which may be required to complete the installation.

The general arrangement indicated on the drawings shall be followed as closely as possible. Coordinate with the Architectural, Structural, Mechanical and Electrical Drawings and the work of other trades prior to installation of piping fixtures and equipment to verify adequate space available for installation of the work shown. In the event a field condition arises which makes it impossible to install the work as indicated, submit, in writing, the proposed departures to the Architect for his approval. Only when Architect's approval is given, in writing, shall Contractor proceed with installation of the work.

Special Note: Should the Contractor make changes in the installation differing from what is indicated on the contract drawings and not necessitated due to field conditions as indicated hereinabove, the Contractor shall be required to re-install the work to comply with what has been indicated on the contract drawings.  Should it be impossible to re-install the work and the installation is in accordance with all governing authorities, the architect may permit the installation to remain.  However, all costs incurred to revise the contract drawings by the engineer for resubmittal to the building department indicating the as-installed condition shall become the responsibility of the Contractor.

In case of a difference in the specifications or between the specifications and the drawings, the Contractor shall figure the most expensive alternate and after award of contract, shall secure direction from the Architect.

PERMITS, INSPECTIONS AND LICENSES

All permits, inspections and licenses required by the legally constituted authorities for installation of the work according to the plans and specifications shall be obtained and paid as a part of the work of this section.

EXAMINATION OF PREMISES

Before bidding on this work, Contractors shall make a careful examination of the premises and shall thoroughly familiarize themselves with the requirements of the contract.  By the act of submitting a proposal for the work included in this contract, the Contractor shall be deemed to have made such study and examination, and that he is familiar with and accepts all conditions of the site.

PROTECTION

All work, equipment and materials shall be protected at all times.  Contractor shall make good all damage caused either directly or indirectly by his own workmen.  Contractor shall also protect his own work from damage.  He shall close all pipe openings with caps or plugs during installation.  He shall protect all his equipment and materials against dirt, water, chemical and mechanical injury.  Upon completion, all work shall be thoroughly cleaned and delivered in a new condition.

Contractor shall be held responsible for all damage to equipment and materials until he has received written notice from the Architect or Engineer that his work has been accepted.

LOCATIONS

The locations of apparatus, piping and equipment indicated on the drawings are approximate. Piping and equipment shall be installed in such a manner as to avoid all obstruction, preserve headroom, and keep openings and passages clear. The locations of and mounting heights of all fixtures shall be coordinated with the architectural plans and room elevations.

Clearances and Openings: Contractor shall cooperate and coordinate his work with all other trades to avoid conflict and permit for a neat and orderly appearance of the entire installation.  The Contractor shall, in advance of the work, furnish instructions to the General Contractor as to his requirements for equipment and material installation of any kind, whether or not specifically mentioned on drawings or in the specifications, and shall include recesses, chases in walls, and all required openings in the structure.  Should furnishing this information be neglected, delayed or incorrect and additional cuttings are found to be required, the cost of the same shall be charged to this Contractor.

Contractor shall verify and coordinate pipe routing with location of all electrical rooms, elevator equipment rooms, telecom/data rooms, and other rooms dedicated to the housing of switchgear, panels, or other electrical equipment. In no case shall piping be installed within or above the ceiling of such rooms.

SUBMITTAL DATA

Submittal Requirements:

Furnish, all at one time, prior to any installation, within the time noted below, six (6) copies of valid submittal data on all fixtures, material, equipment and devices. Each submitted item shall be indexed and referenced to these specifications and to identification numbers on fixtures and equipment schedules.

Manufacturers’ submittal literature and shop drawings are required on all items to ensure the latest and most complete manufacturer's data is available for review. Requirements of the submittals and Engineer's submittal notes are a part of the work of this Division except that Engineer's notes may not be used as a means of increasing the scope of work of this Division.

Submittals will be checked for general conformance with the design concept of the project but the review does not guarantee quantities shown and does not supersede requirements of this Division to properly install work.

To be valid, all submittals must:

Be delivered to the Architect's office within thirty-five (35) days of award of the contract.  Contractor shall make time allowance for Engineer’s review, return of comments, if any, and resubmittal if required. Corrections or changes in submittals returned as inadequate or incomplete shall be accomplished within this time limit.

Clearly indicate and label as such any items proposed as substitution for that specified or shown on plans.

Include all pertinent construction, installation, performance and technical data.

Have all product data sheets clearly labeled to indicate the individual items being submitted. In addition, all required options and accessories shall be clearly marked.

Product data sheets corresponding to items indicated on plans shall be clearly labeled with the corresponding fixture or equipment tag number.

Product data sheets corresponding to items indicated in specifications shall be clearly labeled with the specification section, page and item numbers.

Include, for every item which differs in size, configuration, connections, service, accessibility or any other significant way, a drawing to the same (or larger) scale as to the pertinent portions of the contract drawings.  In this drawing show a complete layout of the system except that which is identical to the contract drawings, unless the unchanged portions must be shown to indicate such things as clearances.  This drawing, together with the contract design drawings must show the complete system as revised to accommodate the proposed alternate.

Substitution Requirements:

Any items included in submittals and proposed by the Contractor as substitution for that specified or shown on plans shall be submitted within thirty five (35) days of award of the contract. After such time, proposed substitutions shall not be accepted for review, and the Contractor shall submit all items as specified or shown on plans.

For each item proposed as substitution for that specified or shown on plans, copies of product data sheets for the specified item shall be placed side by side with product data sheets for the proposed substitution item within the submittal.

In addition to the Submittal Requirements for labeling listed above, product data sheets for the specified item shall be clearly labeled “SPECIFIED ITEM, NOT SUBMITTED”. Product data sheets for the corresponding proposed substitution item shall be clearly labeled “PROPOSED SUBSTITUTION”.

Provide calculations and other detailed data justifying how any items proposed as substitution were selected for proposal.  Data must be complete enough to permit detailed comparison of every significant characteristic for which the specified item was analyzed during design.

It shall be the Contractor’s responsibility to provide sufficient information to allow the Engineer to analyze any proposed alternate.  If inadequate information is provided, the proposal will not be approved and resubmittal will not be allowed.

The Contractor shall provide or perform tests required by Engineer for purpose of judging acceptability of proposed substitutions.

The Contractor assumes full responsibility that alternate items and procedures will meet the job requirements and is responsible for cost of redesign and of modifications to this and other parts of work caused by alternate items furnished under work in this Section.  In view of these responsibilities, it is the purpose of these specifications to establish procedures to ensure that the Contractor has considered all the ramifications of proposed alternates before submitting them for review.  Submittals which do not comply with the requirements of these specifications or which indicate proposed alternates that were selected without proper regard to the requirements of the job will not be approved.  No more than one proposed alternate will be considered for each item.

Alternate items installed without Engineer's approval will be replaced with specified items at Contractor's expense.

The Architect or his authorized representative shall be the sole judge as to the quality and suitability of proposed alternate equipment, fixtures or materials. Decisions of the Architect or that of his representative shall be final and conclusive.

Paragraph below is defined in Section 013300 "Submittal Procedures" as a "Delegated-Design Submittal."  Retain if Work of this Section is required to withstand specific design loads and design responsibilities have been delegated to Contractor or if structural data are required as another way to verify compliance with performance requirements.  Professional engineer qualifications are specified in Section 014000 "Quality Requirements."

QUALITY ASSURANCE

Structural Steel Welding Qualifications:  Qualify procedures and personnel according to AWS D1.1/D1.1M, "Structural Welding Code - Steel."

UNINSPECTED WORK

The Contractor shall not allow or cause any of his work to be covered up or closed in until it has been inspected, tested, approved by all authorities have jurisdiction, and until Project Record drawings have been properly annotated.

Should any of his work be covered up or closed in before such inspection, he shall, at his own expense, uncover the work to the satisfaction of the inspection party.  All related repair work cost shall be borne by the Contractor.

RECORD DRAWINGS

Contractor shall provide and keep up-to-date a complete "as-built" record set of blueline prints which shall show every change from the original drawings and the exact "as-built" locations and sizes of the work provided under this Section of the specifications.  This set shall include locations, dimensions, depth of buried piping, cleanouts, shut-off valves, sewer invert locations, plugged wyes, tees, etc.  On completion of the work, the Contractor shall incorporate all as-built information on a set of reproducible tracings provided by the Architect and this set of reproducibles shall be delivered to the Architect.

GUARANTEES

Contractor shall guarantee the entire plumbing and piping systems unconditionally for a period of one (1) year after final acceptance.  If, during this period, any materials, equipment, or any part of the systems fail to function properly, the Contractor shall make good the defects promptly and without any expense to the Owner.

Contractor shall be responsible for all damage to any part of the premises caused by leaks in pipelines or equipment furnished and installed under this Section for a period of one (1) year after date of acceptance of his work.

All equipment and fixtures shall carry manufacturer's warranty against defective parts or poor workmanship for not less than one (1) year.  See specific equipment specifications for extended warranty requirements.

PRODUCTS

Pipe Supports: Unless otherwise indicated on the drawings, shall be as follows:

The Contractor shall furnish and install all miscellaneous iron work including angles, channels, etc., required to appropriately support the various piping systems.  Hanger spacing and location shall conform to 2022 California Plumbing Code Table 313.1.

All horizontal runs of piping within the building to be supported from the structural framing with steel rods and split ring hangers, B-Line, Grinnell Company, Tolco, or approved equal.  Steel rods shall be secured to overhead framing with side beam connectors.  Where necessary, install angle iron between framing to accommodate hanger rods.  Where several pipes are running together, Unistrut, B-Line or Powerstrut channels with clamps may be used in lieu of individual pipe hangers, and supported from structure as herein specified.  Submit test data for type of hanger supports to be provided.  For support conditions other than specified herein, the Contractor shall submit method of support for approval prior to any installation.

Horizontal Piping Hangers and Supports:

General:  Provide factory fabricated horizontal hangers and supports complying with one of the following MSS types listed to suit horizontal-piping systems, in accordance with MSS SP-69 and manufacturer's published product information. Select size of hangers and supports to exactly fit pipe size for bare piping, and to exactly fit around piping insulation with saddle or shield for insulated piping.  Provide copper-plated hangers and supports for copper-piping systems.

Adjustable Steel Clevis Hangers:  (MSS Type 1.) B-Line B 3100

Adjustable Swivel Pipe Rings: (MSS Type 5) B-Line B3690

Vertical-Piping Clamps:

General:  Provide factory fabricated vertical-piping clamps complying with the following types listed, to suit vertical piping systems, in accordance with MSS SP-69 and manufacturer's published product information.  Select size of vertical piping clamps to exactly fit pipe size of bare pipe.  Provide copper-plated clamps for copper-piping systems.

Two-Bolt Riser Clamps: (MSS Type 8) B-Line B3373

Hanger-Rod Attachments:

General:  Provide factory fabricated hanger-rod attachments B-Line, Tolco or approved equal, selected by Installer to suit horizontal-piping hangers and building attachments, in accordance with MSS SP-58 and manufacturer's published product information. Select size of hanger-rod attachment to suit hanger rods.  Provide copper-plated hanger-rod attachments for copper-piping systems.

Side beam eye socket, Tolco Fig. #57 for rod sizes 3/8" dia. and Tolco Fig. #25-30-251 for rod sizes 1/2" dia.

Building Attachments:

General:  Provide factory fabricated building attachments, selected by Installer to suit building structural framing conditions, in accordance with MSS SP-69 and manufacturer's published product information.  Select size of building attachments to suit hanger rods.  Provide copper-plated building attachments for copper-piping systems.

Hanger Rods and Spacing shall conform to the following table:

Pipe Sizes				Spacing			Rods

2 Inch and Smaller		6 Feet			3/8 Inch

2-1/2 Inch to 3 Inch		8 Feet			1/2 Inch

4 Inch and larger			8 Feet			5/8 Inch

Hangers and Supports shall be adequate to maintain alignment and prevent sagging and shall be placed within 18 inches of joint.  Support shall be provided at each horizontal branch connection.

Provide lateral bracing as manufactured by B-Line or approved equal for all piping to prevent swaying or movement in accordance with SMACNA "Guidelines for Seismic Restraints of Piping Systems".  Piping smaller than indicated in the guidelines shall be provided with bracing as specified for the smallest size indicated.  The entire water distribution system shall be properly braced and will not move due to the action of quick closing of valves.

Miscellaneous Supports, Wall Brackets, Etc.:  Provide where required in accordance with the best standard practices of the trade.  Submit shop drawings for all fabricated supports.

Isolators.  All piping which is not isolated from contact with the building by its insulation shall be installed with a manufactured type isolator.  Isolators shall be B-Line vibra clamp and cushion, Super Strut, Stoneman "Trisolator", or approved equal.  Piping shall be installed and supported in a manner to provide for expansion without strains.  Guides shall be properly installed to ensure this requirement.

Shields:

General:  Provide shields at piping hangers and supports, factory-fabricated, for all insulated piping as manufactured by Pipeshields Incorporated or approved equal.  Size shields for exact fit to mate with pipe insulation.

Protection Shields: MSS Type 40; provide high density insert of same thickness of insulation or equal 100-psi average compressive strength, waterproofed calcium silicate, encased with a sheet metal shield.  Insert and shield shall cover entire circumference of the pipe and shall be of length indicated by manufacturer for pipe size and thickness of insulation.

METAL PIPE HANGERS AND SUPPORTS

Carbon-Steel Pipe Hangers and Supports:

Description:  MSS SP-58, Types 1 through 58, factory-fabricated components.

Galvanized Metallic Coatings:  Pregalvanized or hot dipped.

Nonmetallic Coatings:  Plastic coating, jacket, or liner.

Padded Hangers:  Hanger with fiberglass or other pipe insulation pad or cushion to support bearing surface of piping.

Hanger Rods:  Continuous-thread rod, nuts, and washer made of stainless steel.

Stainless-Steel Pipe Hangers and Supports:

Description:  MSS SP-58, Types 1 through 58, factory-fabricated components.

Padded Hangers:  Hanger with fiberglass or other pipe insulation pad or cushion to support bearing surface of piping.

Hanger Rods:  Continuous-thread rod, nuts, and washer made of stainless steel.

Copper Pipe Hangers:

Manufacturers' catalogs indicate that copper pipe hangers are small, typically NPS 4 (DN 100) or smaller, and types available are limited.

Description:  MSS SP-58, Types 1 through 58, copper-coated-steel, factory-fabricated components.

Hanger Rods:  Continuous-thread rod, nuts, and washer made of stainless steel.

TRAPEZE PIPE HANGERS

Trapeze pipe hanger in paragraph below requires calculating and detailing at each use.

Description:  MSS SP-69, Type 59, shop- or field-fabricated pipe-support assembly made from structural carbon-steel shapes with MSS SP-58 carbon-steel hanger rods, nuts, saddles, and U-bolts.

THERMAL-HANGER SHIELD INSERTS

Manufacturers:  Subject to compliance with requirements, provide products by one of the following:

ERICO International Corporation.

PHS Industries, Inc.

Pipe Shields, Inc.; a subsidiary of Piping Technology & Products, Inc.

Piping Technology & Products, Inc.

Insulation-Insert Material for Hot Piping:  Water-repellent treated, ASTM C 533, Type I calcium silicate with 100-psig ASTM C 552 or Type II cellular glass with 100-psig minimum compressive strength.

For Trapeze or Clamped Systems:  Insert and shield shall cover entire circumference of pipe.

For Clevis or Band Hangers:  Insert and shield shall cover lower 180 degrees of pipe.

Insert Length:  Extend 2 inches beyond sheet metal shield for piping operating below ambient air temperature.

FASTENER SYSTEMS

Verify suitability of fasteners in this article for use in lightweight concrete or concrete slabs less than 4 inches (100 mm) thick.

Powder-Actuated Fasteners:  Threaded-steel stud, for use in hardened portland cement concrete with pull-out, tension, and shear capacities appropriate for supported loads and building materials where used.

Mechanical-Expansion Anchors:  Insert-wedge-type, stainless- steel anchors, for use in hardened portland cement concrete; with pull-out, tension, and shear capacities appropriate for supported loads and building materials where used.

MISCELLANEOUS MATERIALS

Structural Steel:  ASTM A 36/A 36M, carbon-steel plates, shapes, and bars; black and galvanized.

Grout:  ASTM C 1107, factory-mixed and -packaged, dry, hydraulic-cement, nonshrink and nonmetallic grout; suitable for interior and exterior applications.

Properties:  Nonstaining, noncorrosive, and nongaseous.

Design Mix:  5000-psi, 28-day compressive strength.

EXECUTION

HANGER AND SUPPORT INSTALLATION

Metal Pipe-Hanger Installation:  Comply with MSS SP-69 and MSS SP-89.  Install hangers, supports, clamps, and attachments as required to properly support piping from the building structure.

Trapeze pipe hanger in first paragraph below requires calculating and detailing at each use.

Metal Trapeze Pipe-Hanger Installation:  Comply with MSS SP-69 and MSS SP-89.  Arrange for grouping of parallel runs of horizontal piping, and support together on field-fabricated trapeze pipe hangers.

Pipes of Various Sizes:  Support together and space trapezes for smallest pipe size or install intermediate supports for smaller diameter pipes as specified for individual pipe hangers.

Field fabricate from ASTM A 36/A 36M, carbon-steel shapes selected for loads being supported.  Weld steel according to AWS D1.1/D1.1M.

Metal framing system in first paragraph below requires calculating and detailing at each use.

Fiberglass strut system in first paragraph below requires calculating and detailing at each use.

Thermal-Hanger Shield Installation:  Install in pipe hanger or shield for insulated piping.

Fastener System Installation:

Verify suitability of fasteners in two subparagraphs below for use in lightweight concrete or concrete slabs less than 4 inches (100 mm) thick.

Install powder-actuated fasteners for use in lightweight concrete or concrete slabs less than 4 inches thick in concrete after concrete is placed and completely cured.  Use operators that are licensed by powder-actuated tool manufacturer.  Install fasteners according to powder-actuated tool manufacturer's operating manual.

Install mechanical-expansion anchors in concrete after concrete is placed and completely cured.  Install fasteners according to manufacturer's written instructions.

Pipe stand in first paragraph below requires calculating and detailing at each use.

Install hangers and supports complete with necessary attachments, inserts, bolts, rods, nuts, washers, and other accessories.

Equipment support in first paragraph below requires calculating and detailing at each use.

Equipment Support Installation:  Fabricate from welded-structural-steel shapes.

Install hangers and supports to allow controlled thermal and seismic movement of piping systems, to permit freedom of movement between pipe anchors, and to facilitate action of expansion joints, expansion loops, expansion bends, and similar units.

Install lateral bracing with pipe hangers and supports to prevent swaying.

Install building attachments within concrete slabs or attach to structural steel.  Install additional attachments at concentrated loads, including valves, flanges, and strainers, NPS 2-1/2 and larger and at changes in direction of piping.  Install concrete inserts before concrete is placed; fasten inserts to forms and install reinforcing bars through openings at top of inserts.

Load Distribution:  Install hangers and supports so that piping live and dead loads and stresses from movement will not be transmitted to connected equipment.

Pipe Slopes:  Install hangers and supports to provide indicated pipe slopes and to not exceed maximum pipe deflections allowed by ASME B31.9 for building services piping.

Insulated Piping:

Specify parts in first three subparagraphs below as galvanized or painted, as required.  Other materials are available in place of wooden blocks.

Attach clamps and spacers to piping.

Piping Operating above Ambient Air Temperature:  Clamp may project through insulation.

Piping Operating below Ambient Air Temperature:  Use thermal-hanger shield insert with clamp sized to match OD of insert.

Do not exceed pipe stress limits allowed by ASME B31.9 for building services piping.

Install MSS SP-58, Type 39, protection saddles if insulation without vapor barrier is indicated.  Fill interior voids with insulation that matches adjoining insulation.

Option:  Thermal-hanger shield inserts may be used.  Include steel weight-distribution plate for pipe NPS 4 and larger if pipe is installed on rollers.

High-compressive-strength inserts may permit use of shorter shields or shields with less arc span.  Revise first subparagraph below to suit Project.

Shield Dimensions for Pipe:  Not less than the following:

NPS 1/4 to NPS 3-1/2:  12 inches long and 0.048 inch thick.

NPS 4:  12 inches long and 0.06 inch thick.

Pipes NPS 8 and Larger:  Include wood or reinforced calcium-silicate-insulation inserts of length at least as long as protective shield.

Thermal-Hanger Shields:  Install with insulation same thickness as piping insulation.

EQUIPMENT SUPPORTS

Fabricate structural-steel stands to suspend equipment from structure overhead or to support equipment above floor.

Grouting:  Place grout under supports for equipment and make bearing surface smooth.

Provide lateral bracing, to prevent swaying, for equipment supports.

METAL FABRICATIONS

Cut, drill, and fit miscellaneous metal fabrications for trapeze pipe hangers.

Fit exposed connections together to form hairline joints.  Field weld connections that cannot be shop welded because of shipping size limitations.

Field Welding:  Comply with AWS D1.1/D1.1M procedures for shielded, metal arc welding; appearance and quality of welds; and methods used in correcting welding work; and with the following:

Use materials and methods that minimize distortion and develop strength and corrosion resistance of base metals.

Obtain fusion without undercut or overlap.

Remove welding flux immediately.

Finish welds at exposed connections so no roughness shows after finishing and so contours of welded surfaces match adjacent contours.

ADJUSTING

Hanger Adjustments:  Adjust hangers to distribute loads equally on attachments and to achieve indicated slope of pipe.

Trim excess length of continuous-thread hanger and support rods to 1-1/2 inches.

PAINTING

Touchup:  Clean field welds and abraded areas of shop paint.  Paint exposed areas immediately after erecting hangers and supports.  Use same materials as used for shop painting.  Comply with SSPC-PA 1 requirements for touching up field-painted surfaces.

Apply paint by brush or spray to provide a minimum dry film thickness of 2.0 mils.

Touchup:  Cleaning and touchup painting of field welds, bolted connections, and abraded areas of shop paint on miscellaneous metal are specified in Section 099123 "Interior Painting."

Galvanized Surfaces:  Clean welds, bolted connections, and abraded areas and apply galvanizing-repair paint to comply with ASTM A 780.

HANGER AND SUPPORT SCHEDULE

Specific hanger and support requirements are in Sections specifying piping systems and equipment.

Comply with MSS SP-69 for pipe-hanger selections and applications that are not specified in piping system Sections.

Use hangers and supports with galvanized metallic coatings for piping and equipment that will not have field-applied finish.

Use nonmetallic coatings on attachments for electrolytic protection where attachments are in direct contact with copper tubing.

Use carbon-steel pipe hangers and supports metal trapeze pipe hangers and attachments for general service applications.

Use stainless-steel pipe hangers and stainless-steel attachments for hostile environment applications.

Use copper-plated pipe hangers and copper or stainless-steel attachments for copper piping and tubing.

Use thermal-hanger shield inserts for insulated piping and tubing.

Horizontal-Piping Hangers and Supports:  Unless otherwise indicated and except as specified in piping system Sections, install the following types:

Adjustable, Steel Clevis Hangers (MSS Type 1):  For suspension of noninsulated or insulated, stationary pipes NPS 1/2 to NPS 30.

Pipe Hangers (MSS Type 5):  For suspension of pipes NPS 1/2 to NPS 4, to allow off-center closure for hanger installation before pipe erection.

Vertical-Piping Clamps:  Unless otherwise indicated and except as specified in piping system Sections, install the following types:

Extension Pipe or Riser Clamps (MSS Type 8):  For support of pipe risers NPS 3/4 to NPS 24.

Hanger-Rod Attachments:  Unless otherwise indicated and except as specified in piping system Sections, install the following types:

Steel Turnbuckles (MSS Type 13):  For adjustment up to 6 inches for heavy loads.

Steel Clevises (MSS Type 14):  For 120 to 450 deg F piping installations.

Malleable-Iron Sockets (MSS Type 16):  For attaching hanger rods to various types of building attachments.

Steel Weldless Eye Nuts (MSS Type 17):  For 120 to 450 deg F piping installations.

Building Attachments:  Unless otherwise indicated and except as specified in piping system Sections, install the following types:

Steel or Malleable Concrete Inserts (MSS Type 18):  For upper attachment to suspend pipe hangers from concrete ceiling.

Top-Beam C-Clamps (MSS Type 19):  For use under roof installations with bar-joist construction, to attach to top flange of structural shape.

Side-Beam or Channel Clamps (MSS Type 20):  For attaching to bottom flange of beams, channels, or angles.

Center-Beam Clamps (MSS Type 21):  For attaching to center of bottom flange of beams.

C-Clamps (MSS Type 23):  For structural shapes.

Top-Beam Clamps (MSS Type 25):  For top of beams if hanger rod is required tangent to flange edge.

Side-Beam Clamps (MSS Type 27):  For bottom of steel I-beams.

Steel-Beam Clamps with Eye Nuts (MSS Type 28):  For attaching to bottom of steel I-beams for heavy loads.Side-Beam Brackets (MSS Type 34):  For sides of steel or wooden beams.

Horizontal Travelers (MSS Type 58):  For supporting piping systems subject to linear horizontal movement where headroom is limited.

Saddles and Shields:  Unless otherwise indicated and except as specified in piping system Sections, install the following types:

Protection Shields (MSS Type 40):  Of length recommended in writing by manufacturer to prevent crushing insulation.

Thermal-Hanger Shield Inserts:  For supporting insulated pipe.

Comply with MSS SP-69 for trapeze pipe-hanger selections and applications that are not specified in piping system Sections.

Use powder-actuated fasteners or mechanical-expansion anchors instead of building attachments where required in concrete construction.

END OF SECTION 22 05 29