SECTION 21 13 13 – AUTOMATIC FIRE SPRINKLERS

Use this Section if Project is in a seismic area.  Use Section 230548.13 "Vibration Controls for HVAC" for Projects not in a seismic area.

GENERAL

SECTION INCLUDES

Design, furnish and install wet pipe fire sprinkler system for protection of building.

Furnish all labor, materials, services, testing, transportation and equipment necessary for and reasonably incidental to the proper and satisfactory installation of the automatic fire protection systems as specified herein.

Work or equipment not indicated or specified which is necessary for the complete and proper operation of the work of the Section in accordance with the true intent and meaning of the contract documents shall be provided by this contractor and incorporated under this Section of the work at no additional cost.

DESIGN REQUIREMENTS

Wet pipe fire sprinkler system shall conform to NFPA13, 2022 edition.

Contractor shall prepare fully coordinated shop drawings for approval prior to installation.  Contractor shall not make substantial changes and must determine final number of fittings and routing to meet system and building demands.

Pipe sizes used in shop drawings shall not be less than those shown on drawings.

Manufacture’s Data

Submit complete and detailed equipment and material list of items to be furnished and installed under this Section.

Submit manufacturer’s specifications and other data required to demonstrate compliance with specified requirements.

Drawings and Hydraulic calculations

System shall be hydraulically designed per NFPA 13 requirements.

Drawings shall be made in AutoCAD 2019 version as the latest.  Drawings shall be same size as contract drawings.

QUALIFICATIONS

Retain terms that remain after this Section has been edited for a project.

Code Requirements:  All work covered by this Section shall conform to the 2022 edition of NFPA 13, California State Fire Marshal, DSA, Uniform Fire Code with California amendments.

UL and FM Compliance:  All material and components shall be UL listed and labeled and/or Factory Mutual Approved for the application anticipated.

Permits and Inspections:  Contractor must obtain and pay all fees for permits, licenses, inspections, etc. which are required and shall deliver all certificates to Owner.

Installing contractor shall have a current C-16 license and have had prior experience in similar scope of this project within last 5 years.

REGULATORY REQUIREMENTS

All work covered in this Section shall conform to the regulatory requirements of California State Fire Marshal, DSA, Uniform Fire Code with California amendments.  If there are conflicts the stricter standard shall apply.

SCHEDULING

Contractor shall coordinate installation of system with all other trades.

Examination of Premises

Contractor shall make a careful examination of the premises and shall thoroughly familiarize themselves with the requirements of the contract.  By submitting a proposal for the work under this section of the specification, the Contractor shall be deemed to have made such a study and the he is familiar with and accepts all conditions of the site.

Coordination

Contractor shall cooperate and coordinate his work with all other trades to avoid confliction and permit for a neat and orderly appearance of the entire installation.  The contractor shall, in advance of the work, furnish instructions to the General Contractor as to his requirements for equipment and material installation of any kind, whether or not specifically mentioned on drawing or in specifications, and shall include recesses, chases in walls, and all required openings in the structure.  Should furnishing this information be neglected, delayed or incorrect and additional cuttings are found to be required, this cost shall be charge to this Contractor.

Piping runs found to be in conflict with the work of other trades, as a result of neglected coordination, shall be removed and reinstalled in new locations designated by the architect at no additional cost to the Owner.

To achieve coordination, contractor shall contact Architect and obtain necessary information to design his system into the allotted spaces without interfering with work by other trades.

PRODUCTS

Coordinate specifications for products in this Section with structural engineer and with Drawings.

REQUIRMENTS

Copy "Elastomeric Isolation Pads" Paragraph below and re-edit for each product.

The configuration and materials of elastomeric isolation pads depend on the equipment being supported.  It is possible to have more than one type of elastomeric isolation pad on the same Project.  Insert Drawing designation for each elastomeric isolation pad type required.  Use these designations on Drawings to identify each product.

Submittal Data

Furnish and install at one time, in accordance with General Conditions, PDF copies of valid submittal data on all material, equipment and devices.  The Contractor shall make all presentations and clarifications although he may bring suppliers and representatives for technical assistance to meetings called by architect.  Each submitted item shall be indexed and referenced to these specifications and to put identification numbers on fixture and equipment submittals.

Submittals are required on all items to insure the latest and most complete manufacturer’s data is available for review.  Manufacturer’s submittal literature and shop drawings often contain information not available in design literature; requirements of the submittals and engineer’s submittal notes are part of the work of this Section except that engineer’s notes may be used as a means of increasing the scope of work of this Section.

Submittals will be checked for general conformance with the design concept of the project, but the review does not guarantee quantities shown and does not supersede requirements of the Division to properly install work.

Wet Pipe System

Black Steel, 1”-2”, Schedule 40, ASTM A135 or ASTM A795 for all piping with threaded joints and fittings.  Pipe must be UL Listed.

Black Steel 2 ½” -6”, Schedule 10, ASTM A135 or ASTM A795 for all piping with grooved joints and fittings.

Threaded fitting shall be cast iron, class 125, conforming to ANSI B16.3 and ANSI B16.4.

Flanged fittings shall be cast iron, class 125, conforming to ANSI B16.9.

Welded fitting shall be forged steel welding outlet fitting conforming to ANSI B1.20.1

One-piece reducing fittings shall be used wherever a change is made in pipe size.  Bushings and reducing couplings shall not be permitted.

Sprinkler Heads

Provide sprinklers of types and sizes as indicated on drawings.

Provide upright sprinklers in areas with exposed piping.

Sprinklers shall be glass bulb type.

Sprinklers in concealed spaces, exterior locations and any other areas which may experience over 100 degrees F ambient temperatures shall be furnished with 200 to 225 degree rated sprinklers.  Sprinkler heads in boiler rooms shall be furnished with sprinklers rated at 250 to 290 degrees F.

Sprinklers may be 401 canopy type with head guard installed in ceiling with surface mounted lighting.

Sprinkler heads in light hazard occupancy shall be quick response type.  Sprinklers shall be same manufacturer throughout.  Extended coverage heads will not be permitted.

Sprinklers shall be installed in center of tile at 12” increments from tile edge and shall be aligned with other ceiling mounted devices.

Sprinkler head guards shall be installed where any sprinkler is subject to damage and at elevations of 7’-6” or lower in exposed locations.  Sprinkler head guards shall utilize a bolt-on feature to the base of the sprinkler or be a factory installed guard. Install head guards in gymnasium and locker room.

Sprinklers installed underneath catwalks, floors or other intermediate areas shall have intermediate heat shield attached.

Flow indicator shall have retard feature and set between 45 and 90 seconds.  Connection of this work shall be under Division 26.  All shut-off valves including PIV and backflow preventer shall be electronically supervised.

Pipe through ceilings at head locations shall be furnished with a two-piece or fully concealed escutcheon.  Escutcheons shall be identical and match the other escutcheon of the same type throughout the building.  Exposed pipe through walls and =ceilings shall have split ring chrome escutcheon.

Furnish and install all required signs, spare heads, special wrenches and spare sprinkler heads and boxes as required by NFPA13.

Sprinkler system piping shall be provided with complete drainage as required by NFPA 13.  All drain valves shall be plugged and piped to accessible location.  Those installed within walls shall be equipped with locking access panels.

Provide seismic separation assemblies as indicated.  Assembly shall be UL/FM swing joint assembly rated at a minimum of 175 psi.

System main drain shall be piped to nearest standpipe drain in riser room.

Hanging, bracing and support shall utilize only UL/FM approved products and comply with NFPA 13.   Hanging, bracing and supports shall be by one manufacturer and listed as an approved assembly.

Verify availability of various pad materials and their properties with manufacturers.

Copy "Sandwich-Core Material" Subparagraph below and re-edit for each sandwich-core material.  Core materials may not be elastomeric.  See the "Elastomeric Isolation Pads" Article in the Evaluations for more information.

MATERIALS

Copy "Freestanding, Laterally Stable, Open-Spring Isolators with Vertical-Limit Stop Restraint" Paragraph below and re-edit for each product.

The configuration and materials of restrained-spring isolators depend on the equipment being supported.  It is possible to have more than one type of restrained-spring isolator on the same Project.  Insert drawing designation for each restrained-spring isolator type required.  Use these designations on Drawings to identify each product.

ACCESS PANELS

Square, stainless steel, with vandal proof door lock operated by allen wrench: Manufacturer’s:  Smith – 4760, Elmdor – DW-AKL

Globe or Angle Valves:  UL/FM

Bronze 2 inches and smaller, screwed in bonnet, threaded ends, riding stem:  Manufacturers: Nibco-T301, Kennedy-98 SD – United-126T

Automatic Sprinkler Head

Brass uprights – temperature, size and k-factor as indicated on drawings:  Manufacturers: Tyco-TY3131

Fully concealed, white or chrome cover: temperature, size and k-factor as indicated in drawings.  Manufacturer Tyco-TY3531

Confirm cover plate color with architect prior to ordering.

Gear Operated Butterfly Valves:  Grooved end, gear operated Butterfly Valve, 300 psi for fire protection and sprinkler risers.  UL/FM Listed and Approved, with weatherproof gearbox and DPDT monitor switch, double seal design for bubble tight shut off at 175 psi.  Corrosion resistant, fusion bonded nylon II body coating, easy to read position indicator:  Manufacturers: Victualic705W, Tyco-580, Nibco-GD-4765-8N,.Kennedy-82M

EXECUTION

EXAMINATION

Examine areas and conditions under which Work of this section shall be performed.  Correct conditions detrimental to proper and timely completion of Work.  Do not proceed until unsatisfactory conditions have been corrected.

PREPARATION

Ream pipe and tube ends.  Remove all burrs. Bevel or groove all plain end ferrous pipe ends.

Protection

All work, equipment and materials shall be protected at all time.  Contractor shall repair all damage caused either indirectly or directly by his own workers.  Contractor shall also protect his own work from damage.  He shall sloe all pipe openings with caps or plugs during installation.  He shall protect all his equipment and materials against dirt, water, chemical and mechanical injury.

Contractor shall be held responsible for all damage to equipment and material until he has received written notice from the Architect or Engineer that work has been accepted

Uninspected work

The contractor shall not allow or cause any of his work to be covered up or closed until it has been inspected, tested and approved by all authorities having jurisdiction and until Project Record drawings have been properly annotated.

Should any of his work be covered up or closed in before such inspection, he shall, at his own expense, uncover the work to the satisfaction of the inspection party.  All related work cost shall be borne by the contractor.

Record Drawings

Contractor shall provide and keep up-to-date a complete “as-built” record set of red line drawings which shall show every change from the original drawings and the exact “as-built” locations and size of the work provided under this section.  This set shall include locations, dimensions, depth of bury.  On completion of the work this set of prints shall be delivered to the Architect and updated on CAD drawings by Contractor.

Final Approval

Prior to final acceptance of the installation, the contractor shall furnish to the Architect “certificates of approval” signed by the State Fire Marshall having jurisdiction, stating that the systems, as installed, have been inspected and tested and meet all governing code requirements.

Guarantees

Contractor shall guarantee the automatic fire sprinkler system unconditionally for a period of one (1) year after final acceptance.  If during this period, any material, equipment or any part of the system fail to function properly, Contractor shall make good the defects and without any expense to the Owner.

Indicate on Drawings, by details, schedules, or a combination of both, the locations where hanger rods for individual pipes and hanger rods for trapeze hangers require hanger-rod stiffeners.

CLEANING

Remove scale and foreign matter from inside and outside of pipes before assembly.

INSTALLATION

Coordinate this article with Drawings.

Install underground piping connected to detector check or water main indicated 5’-0” from building.  Braced or clamped bends shall be in accordance with the requirements of NFPA 24.  Provide vertical clamp rods at flange and spigot piece of riser, long enough to pass through riser’s base flange where required.  Furnish concrete thrust blocks where required.  Tracer wire shall be according to other provision of this project’s specification.

Install check valves, control valves, gauges inspectors test and drain assemblies and flow indicator per DSA approved drawings.

Pipe through floors, wall and ceiling, at head locations, shall be furnished with required sleeves, escutcheons and fire caulking where indicated or required by code.  Escutcheons shall be polished chrome plated in unfinished area and white in areas with ceilings unless other finish is selected by Architect.

Sprinkler system shall be provided with complete drainage facilities in accordance with CBC standards.  Drain discharge shall be into sanitary sewer and such drainage receptacles shall be designed to accept the full flow of water at drain test conditions under full working pressure.

Upon completion of work and before substantial completion, subject entire system, including underground piping, to tests as required by NFPA13 and CBC standards and furnish Owner with a certificate of compliance as required.

Close nipples and threaded unions are prohibited.  Where a threaded union or coupling is need, a groove type fitting shall be used.

Mechanical tee bolted branch outlet fittings and plain-end locking fittings are prohibited.

Grooved joints shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s latest published installation instructions.  Grooved ends shall be clean and free from indentations, projections, and roll marks in the area from pipe end to groove.  Gaskets shall be of elastomer grade suitable for the intended service, and shall be molded and produced by the coupling manufacturer.

Sprinkler lines within the building shall be concealed within the structure.  Risers shall be installed as indicated in drawings.

Sprinklers that have been dropped, damaged, have cracked bulbs, or show a visible loss of fluid shall not be installed.

Sprinkler bulb protectors shall be removed by hand after installation.

Routing of pipe in exposed areas shall be subject to the Architects approval in the final shop drawings.

Underground piping shall have a 36” minimum bury.  Pipe shall be installed on a flat undisturbed sand bed.  After required pressure leak test, pipe shall be covered with sand not less than 6 inches thick before backfilling.  Comply with all NFPA Standards.

CLEANING

Remove rubbish, debris and waste material and legally dispose at off-project site.

END OF SECTION 211313