SECTION 22 05 17 - SLEEVES AND SLEEVE SEALS FOR PLUMBING PIPING

GENERAL

RELATED DOCUMENTS

Drawings and general provisions of the Contract, including General and Supplementary Conditions and Division 01 Specification Sections, apply to this Section.

SUMMARY

Section Includes:

Sleeves.

Sleeve-seal systems.

Grout.

WORK INCLUDED

Furnish all labor, materials, services, testing, transportation and equipment necessary for the completion of all plumbing work as indicated on drawings and specified herein. Work materials and equipment not indicated or specified which is necessary for the complete and proper operation of the work of this Section in accordance with the true intent and meaning of the contract documents shall be provided and incorporated at no additional cost to the Owner.

QUALITY ASSURANCE

Code Requirements: All work covered by this Section shall conform to the latest requirements of the following regulations:

C.C.R., Title 24, Part 5 (2022 CPC).

2022 California Plumbing Code.

SMACNA Seismic Restraint Manual Guidelines for Mechanical Systems.

National Fire Protection Association.

California State Division of Industrial Safety.

County Health Department.

Any other legally constituted body-having jurisdiction thereof.

Nothing in the specifications or drawings shall be construed to permit deviation from the requirements of governing codes unless approval for said deviation has been obtained from the legally constituted authorities having jurisdiction and from the Owner's representative.

DRAWINGS

Because of the small-scale drawings, it is not possible to indicate all offsets, fittings and accessories which may be required. The Contractor shall carefully investigate the conditions surrounding installation of his work, furnishing the necessary piping, fittings, valves, traps, and other devices which may be required to complete the installation.

The general arrangement indicated on the drawings shall be followed as closely as possible. Coordinate with the Architectural, Structural, Mechanical and Electrical Drawings and the work of other trades prior to installation of piping fixtures and equipment to verify adequate space available for installation of the work shown. In the event a field condition arises which makes it impossible to install the work as indicated, submit, in writing, the proposed departures to the Architect for his approval. Only when Architect's approval is given, in writing, shall Contractor proceed with installation of the work.

Special Note: Should the Contractor make changes in the installation differing from what is indicated on the contract drawings and not necessitated due to field conditions as indicated hereinabove, the Contractor shall be required to re-install the work to comply with what has been indicated on the contract drawings.  Should it be impossible to re-install the work and the installation is in accordance with all governing authorities, the architect may permit the installation to remain.  However, all costs incurred to revise the contract drawings by the engineer for resubmittal to the building department indicating the as-installed condition shall become the responsibility of the Contractor.

In case of a difference in the specifications or between the specifications and the drawings, the Contractor shall figure the most expensive alternate and after award of contract, shall secure direction from the Architect.

PERMITS, INSPECTIONS AND LICENSES

All permits, inspections and licenses required by the legally constituted authorities for installation of the work according to the plans and specifications shall be obtained and paid as a part of the work of this section.

EXAMINATION OF PREMISES

Before bidding on this work, Contractors shall make a careful examination of the premises and shall thoroughly familiarize themselves with the requirements of the contract.  By the act of submitting a proposal for the work included in this contract, the Contractor shall be deemed to have made such study and examination, and that he is familiar with and accepts all conditions of the site.

PROTECTION

All work, equipment and materials shall be protected at all times.  Contractor shall make good all damage caused either directly or indirectly by his own workmen.  Contractor shall also protect his own work from damage.  He shall close all pipe openings with caps or plugs during installation.  He shall protect all his equipment and materials against dirt, water, chemical and mechanical injury.  Upon completion, all work shall be thoroughly cleaned and delivered in a new condition.

Contractor shall be held responsible for all damage to equipment and materials until he has received written notice from the Architect or Engineer that his work has been accepted.

LOCATIONS

The locations of apparatus, piping and equipment indicated on the drawings are approximate. Piping and equipment shall be installed in such a manner as to avoid all obstruction, preserve headroom, and keep openings and passages clear. The locations of and mounting heights of all fixtures shall be coordinated with the architectural plans and room elevations.

Clearances and Openings: Contractor shall cooperate and coordinate his work with all other trades to avoid conflict and permit for a neat and orderly appearance of the entire installation.  The Contractor shall, in advance of the work, furnish instructions to the General Contractor as to his requirements for equipment and material installation of any kind, whether or not specifically mentioned on drawings or in the specifications, and shall include recesses, chases in walls, and all required openings in the structure.  Should furnishing this information be neglected, delayed or incorrect and additional cuttings are found to be required, the cost of the same shall be charged to this Contractor.

Contractor shall verify and coordinate pipe routing with location of all electrical rooms, elevator equipment rooms, telecom/data rooms, and other rooms dedicated to the housing of switchgear, panels, or other electrical equipment. In no case shall piping be installed within or above the ceiling of such rooms.

SUBMITTAL DATA

Submittal Requirements:

Furnish, all at one time, prior to any installation, within the time noted below, six (6) copies of valid submittal data on all fixtures, material, equipment and devices. Each submitted item shall be indexed and referenced to these specifications and to identification numbers on fixtures and equipment schedules.

Manufacturers’ submittal literature and shop drawings are required on all items to ensure the latest and most complete manufacturer's data is available for review. Requirements of the submittals and Engineer's submittal notes are a part of the work of this Division except that Engineer's notes may not be used as a means of increasing the scope of work of this Division.

Submittals will be checked for general conformance with the design concept of the project but the review does not guarantee quantities shown and does not supersede requirements of this Division to properly install work.

To be valid, all submittals must:

Be delivered to the Architect's office within thirty-five (35) days of award of the contract.  Contractor shall make time allowance for Engineer’s review, return of comments, if any, and resubmittal if required. Corrections or changes in submittals returned as inadequate or incomplete shall be accomplished within this time limit.

Clearly indicate and label as such any items proposed as substitution for that specified or shown on plans.

Include all pertinent construction, installation, performance and technical data.

Have all product data sheets clearly labeled to indicate the individual items being submitted. In addition, all required options and accessories shall be clearly marked.

Product data sheets corresponding to items indicated on plans shall be clearly labeled with the corresponding fixture or equipment tag number.

Product data sheets corresponding to items indicated in specifications shall be clearly labeled with the specification section, page and item numbers.

Include, for every item which differs in size, configuration, connections, service, accessibility or any other significant way, a drawing to the same (or larger) scale as to the pertinent portions of the contract drawings.  In this drawing show a complete layout of the system except that which is identical to the contract drawings, unless the unchanged portions must be shown to indicate such things as clearances.  This drawing, together with the contract design drawings must show the complete system as revised to accommodate the proposed alternate.

Substitution Requirements:

Any items included in submittals and proposed by the Contractor as substitution for that specified or shown on plans shall be submitted within thirty five (35) days of award of the contract. After such time, proposed substitutions shall not be accepted for review, and the Contractor shall submit all items as specified or shown on plans.

For each item proposed as substitution for that specified or shown on plans, copies of product data sheets for the specified item shall be placed side by side with product data sheets for the proposed substitution item within the submittal.

In addition to the Submittal Requirements for labeling listed above, product data sheets for the specified item shall be clearly labeled “SPECIFIED ITEM, NOT SUBMITTED”. Product data sheets for the corresponding proposed substitution item shall be clearly labeled “PROPOSED SUBSTITUTION”.

Provide calculations and other detailed data justifying how any items proposed as substitution were selected for proposal.  Data must be complete enough to permit detailed comparison of every significant characteristic for which the specified item was analyzed during design.

It shall be the Contractor’s responsibility to provide sufficient information to allow the Engineer to analyze any proposed alternate.  If inadequate information is provided, the proposal will not be approved and resubmittal will not be allowed.

The Contractor shall provide or perform tests required by Engineer for purpose of judging acceptability of proposed substitutions.

The Contractor assumes full responsibility that alternate items and procedures will meet the job requirements and is responsible for cost of redesign and of modifications to this and other parts of work caused by alternate items furnished under work in this Section.  In view of these responsibilities, it is the purpose of these specifications to establish procedures to ensure that the Contractor has considered all the ramifications of proposed alternates before submitting them for review.  Submittals which do not comply with the requirements of these specifications or which indicate proposed alternates that were selected without proper regard to the requirements of the job will not be approved.  No more than one proposed alternate will be considered for each item.

Alternate items installed without Engineer's approval will be replaced with specified items at Contractor's expense.

The Architect or his authorized representative shall be the sole judge as to the quality and suitability of proposed alternate equipment, fixtures or materials. Decisions of the Architect or that of his representative shall be final and conclusive.

UNINSPECTED WORK

The Contractor shall not allow or cause any of his work to be covered up or closed in until it has been inspected, tested, approved by all authorities have jurisdiction, and until Project Record drawings have been properly annotated.

Should any of his work be covered up or closed in before such inspection, he shall, at his own expense, uncover the work to the satisfaction of the inspection party.  All related repair work cost shall be borne by the Contractor.

RECORD DRAWINGS

Contractor shall provide and keep up-to-date a complete "as-built" record set of blueline prints which shall show every change from the original drawings and the exact "as-built" locations and sizes of the work provided under this Section of the specifications.  This set shall include locations, dimensions, depth of buried piping, cleanouts, shut-off valves, sewer invert locations, plugged wyes, tees, etc.  On completion of the work, the Contractor shall incorporate all as-built information on a set of reproducible tracings provided by the Architect and this set of reproducibles shall be delivered to the Architect.

GUARANTEES

Contractor shall guarantee the entire plumbing and piping systems unconditionally for a period of one (1) year after final acceptance.  If, during this period, any materials, equipment, or any part of the systems fail to function properly, the Contractor shall make good the defects promptly and without any expense to the Owner.

Contractor shall be responsible for all damage to any part of the premises caused by leaks in pipelines or equipment furnished and installed under this Section for a period of one (1) year after date of acceptance of his work.

All equipment and fixtures shall carry manufacturer's warranty against defective parts or poor workmanship for not less than one (1) year.  See specific equipment specifications for extended warranty requirements.

PRODUCTS

SLEEVES: Shall be plastic or galvanized steel where pipes pass through concrete walls or floor slabs.

Isolate pipes through ground floor slabs with Kraft paper, plastic tape or similar materials unless conduit is specified or indicated.

Sleeves for pipes through exterior walls shall be non-metallic with minimum 2” weep ring as manufactured by Link Seal.  Pipe shall be sealed with Link Seal modular seal with EPDM seal elements.

Sleeves in or through fire rated walls shall be per U.L. Fire Resistance System No. WL1146 for drywall construction, and U.L. Fire Resistance System No. CAJ1044 for concrete construction.  See architectural plans for all locations of rated walls.

Galvanized-Steel Wall Pipes:  ASTM A 53/A 53M, Schedule 40, with plain ends and welded steel collar; zinc coated.

Galvanized-Steel-Pipe Sleeves:  ASTM A 53/A 53M, Type E, Grade B, Schedule 40, zinc coated, with plain ends.

PVC sleeves in first paragraph below may be prohibited by fire authorities having jurisdiction.

Molded-PE or -PP Sleeves:  Removable, tapered-cup shaped, and smooth outer surface with nailing flange for attaching to wooden forms.

PVC sleeves in paragraph below may be prohibited by fire authorities having jurisdiction.

SLEEVE-SEAL SYSTEMS

Sleeve-seal systems in this article are used for piping penetrations in slabs-on-grade and below grade in exterior walls.  These systems are available for NPS 1/2 to NPS 48 (DN 15 to DN 1200) piping.

Manufacturers:  Subject to compliance with requirements, provide products by one of the following:

Advance Products & Systems, Inc.

Metraflex Company (The).

Pipeline Seal and Insulator, Inc.

Description:  Modular sealing-element unit, designed for field assembly, for filling annular space between piping and sleeve.

Sealing Elements:  EPDM-rubber interlocking links shaped to fit surface of pipe.  Include type and number required for pipe material and size of pipe.

Pressure Plates:  Stainless steel.

Connecting Bolts and Nuts:  Stainless steel of length required to secure pressure plates to sealing elements.

GROUT

Standard:  ASTM C 1107/C 1107M, Grade B, post-hardening and volume-adjusting, dry, hydraulic-cement grout.

Characteristics:  Nonshrink; recommended for interior and exterior applications.

Design Mix:  5000-psi, 28-day compressive strength.

Packaging:  Premixed and factory packaged.

EXECUTION

SLEEVE INSTALLATION

Install sleeves for piping passing through penetrations in floors, partitions, roofs, and walls.

For sleeves that will have sleeve-seal system installed, select sleeves of size large enough to provide 1-inch annular clear space between piping and concrete slabs and walls.

Sleeves are not required for core-drilled holes.

Install sleeves in concrete floors, concrete roof slabs, and concrete walls as new slabs and walls are constructed.

Permanent sleeves are not required for holes in slabs formed by molded-PE or -PP sleeves.

Cut sleeves to length for mounting flush with both surfaces.

Using grout, seal the space outside of sleeves in slabs and walls without sleeve-seal system.

Install sleeves for pipes passing through interior partitions.

Cut sleeves to length for mounting flush with both surfaces.

Revise first subparagraph below as required for seismic design conditions.  Coordinate sleeve requirements with Section 220719 "Plumbing Piping Insulation."

Install sleeves that are large enough to provide 1/4-inch annular clear space between sleeve and pipe or pipe insulation.

Seal annular space between sleeve and piping or piping insulation; use joint sealants appropriate for size, depth, and location of joint.  Comply with requirements for sealants specified in Section 079200 "Joint Sealants."

Fire-Barrier Penetrations:  Maintain indicated fire rating of walls, partitions, ceilings, and floors at pipe penetrations.  Seal pipe penetrations with firestop materials.  Comply with requirements for firestopping specified in Section 078413 "Penetration Firestopping."

SLEEVE-SEAL-SYSTEM INSTALLATION

Sleeve-seal systems in this article are used, in slabs-on-grade and below grade in exterior concrete walls, for a watertight seal around service piping entries into the building.  These systems typically require installation in a sleeve for proper operation.

Install sleeve-seal systems in sleeves in exterior concrete walls and slabs-on-grade at service piping entries into building.

Select type, size, and number of sealing elements required for piping material and size and for sleeve ID or hole size.  Position piping in center of sleeve.  Center piping in penetration, assemble sleeve-seal system components, and install in annular space between piping and sleeve.  Tighten bolts against pressure plates that cause sealing elements to expand and make a watertight seal.

SLEEVE AND SLEEVE-SEAL SCHEDULE

Use sleeves and sleeve seals for the following piping-penetration applications:

Exterior Concrete Walls below Grade:

Piping Smaller Than NPS 6:  Galvanized-steel wall sleeves with sleeve-seal system.

Select sleeve size to allow for 1-inch annular clear space between piping and sleeve for installing sleeve-seal system.

Concrete Slabs-on-Grade:

Piping Smaller Than NPS 6:  Galvanized-steel wall sleeves with sleeve-seal system.

Select sleeve size to allow for 1-inch annular clear space between piping and sleeve for installing sleeve-seal system.

Concrete Slabs above Grade:

Piping Smaller Than NPS 6:  Galvanized-steel-pipe sleeves.

Interior Partitions:

Verify, with fire authorities having jurisdiction, that PVC materials are allowed for sleeves.

Piping Smaller Than NPS 6:  Galvanized-steel-pipe sleeves.

END OF SECTION 22 05 17