SECTION 230529 – HANGERS AND SUPPORTS FOR HVAC PIPING AND EQUIPMENT

GENERAL

RELATED DOCUMENTS

Drawings and general provisions of the Contract, including General and Supplementary Conditions and Division 01 Specification Sections, apply to this Section.

SUMMARY

Section Includes:

Metal pipe hangers and supports.

Trapeze pipe hangers.

Metal framing systems.

Thermal-hanger shield inserts.

Fastener systems.

Pipe stands.

Equipment supports.

Related Sections:

Section 230548 "Vibration and Seismic Controls for HVAC for vibration isolation devices.

Section 233113 "Metal Ducts" for duct hangers and supports.

DEFINITIONS

Retain definitions remaining after this Section has been edited.

MSS:  Manufacturers Standardization Society of The Valve and Fittings Industry Inc.

PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS

Structural Performance:  Hangers and supports for HVAC piping and equipment shall withstand the effects of gravity loads and stresses within limits and under conditions indicated according to ASCE/SEI 7.

Design supports for multiple pipes, including pipe stands, capable of supporting combined weight of supported systems, system contents, and test water.

Design equipment supports capable of supporting combined operating weight of supported equipment and connected systems and components.

Design seismic-restraint hangers and supports for piping and equipment.

ACTION SUBMITTALS

Product Data:  For each type of product indicated.

Shop Drawings:  Signed and sealed by a qualified professional engineer. Show fabrication and installation details and include calculations for the following; include Product Data for components:

Trapeze pipe hangers.

Metal framing systems.

Fiberglass strut systems.

Pipe stands.

Equipment supports.

Paragraph below is defined in Section 013300 "Submittal Procedures" as a "Delegated-Design Submittal."  Retain if Work of this Section is required to withstand specific design loads and design responsibilities have been delegated to Contractor or if structural data are required as another way to verify compliance with performance requirements.  Professional engineer qualifications are specified in Section 014000 "Quality Requirements."

INFORMATIONAL SUBMITTALS

Welding certificates.

QUALITY ASSURANCE

Structural Steel Welding Qualifications:  Qualify procedures and personnel according to AWS D1.1/D1.1M, "Structural Welding Code - Steel."

Pipe Welding Qualifications:  Qualify procedures and operators according to ASME Boiler and Pressure Vessel Code.

PRODUCTS

METAL PIPE HANGERS AND SUPPORTS

Carbon-Steel Pipe Hangers and Supports:

Description:  MSS SP-58, Types 1 through 58, factory-fabricated components.

Galvanized Metallic Coatings:  Pregalvanized or hot dipped.

Nonmetallic Coatings:  Plastic coating, jacket, or liner.

Padded Hangers:  Hanger with fiberglass or other pipe insulation pad or cushion to support bearing surface of piping.

Hanger Rods:  Continuous-thread rod, nuts, and washer made of carbon steel.

Stainless-Steel Pipe Hangers and Supports:

Description:  MSS SP-58, Types 1 through 58, factory-fabricated components.

Padded Hangers:  Hanger with fiberglass or other pipe insulation pad or cushion to support bearing surface of piping.

Hanger Rods:  Continuous-thread rod, nuts, and washer made of stainless steel.

Copper Pipe Hangers:

Manufacturers' catalogs indicate that copper pipe hangers are small, typically NPS 4 (DN 100) or smaller, and types available are limited.

Description:  MSS SP-58, Types 1 through 58, copper-coated-steel, factory-fabricated components.

Hanger Rods:  Continuous-thread rod, nuts, and washer made of copper-coated steel.

TRAPEZE PIPE HANGERS

Trapeze pipe hanger in paragraph below requires calculating and detailing at each use.

Description:  MSS SP-69, Type 59, shop- or field-fabricated pipe-support assembly made from structural carbon-steel shapes with MSS SP-58 carbon-steel hanger rods, nuts, saddles, and U-bolts.

METAL FRAMING SYSTEMS

Metal framing systems in this article require calculating and detailing at each use.

Framing systems in first paragraph below are made by MFMA members.

MFMA Manufacturer Metal Framing Systems:

Manufacturers:  Subject to compliance with requirements, provide products by one of the following:

Allied Tube & Conduit.

Cooper B-Line, Inc.

Flex-Strut Inc.

GS Metals Corp.

Thomas & Betts Corporation.

Unistrut Corporation; Tyco International, Ltd.

Description:  Shop- or field-fabricated pipe-support assembly for supporting multiple parallel pipes.

Standard:  MFMA-4.

Channels:  Continuous slotted steel channel with inturned lips.

Channel Nuts:  Formed or stamped steel nuts or other devices designed to fit into channel slot and, when tightened, prevent slipping along channel.

Hanger Rods:  Continuous-thread rod, nuts, and washer made of carbon steel.

Metallic Coating:  Electroplated zinc.

Framing systems in paragraph below should be equal to or able to exceed MFMA-4 requirements.

Non-MFMA Manufacturer Metal Framing Systems:

Manufacturers:  Subject to compliance with requirements, provide products by one of the following:

Allied Tube & Conduit.

Cooper B-Line, Inc.

Flex-Strut Inc.

GS Metals Corp.

Thomas & Betts Corporation.

Unistrut Corporation; Tyco International, Ltd.

Description:  Shop- or field-fabricated pipe-support assembly made of steel channels, accessories, fittings, and other components for supporting multiple parallel pipes.

Standard:  Comply with MFMA-4.

Channels:  Continuous slotted steel channel with inturned lips.

Channel Nuts:  Formed or stamped steel nuts or other devices designed to fit into channel slot and, when tightened, prevent slipping along channel.

Hanger Rods:  Continuous-thread rod, nuts, and washer made of carbon steel.

Coating:  Zinc.

THERMAL-HANGER SHIELD INSERTS

Manufacturers:  Subject to compliance with requirements, provide products by one of the following:

Carpenter & Paterson, Inc.

Clement Support Services.

ERICO International Corporation.

National Pipe Hanger Corporation.

PHS Industries, Inc.

Pipe Shields, Inc.; a subsidiary of Piping Technology & Products, Inc.

Piping Technology & Products, Inc.

Rilco Manufacturing Co., Inc.

Value Engineered Products, Inc.

Insulation-Insert Material for Cold Piping:  Water-repellent treated, ASTM C 533, Type I calcium silicate with 100-psig minimum compressive strength.

Insulation-Insert Material for Hot Piping:  Water-repellent treated, ASTM C 533, Type I calcium silicate with 100-psig minimum compressive strength.

For Trapeze or Clamped Systems:  Insert and shield shall cover entire circumference of pipe.

For Clevis or Band Hangers:  Insert and shield shall cover lower 180 degrees of pipe.

Insert Length:  Extend 2 inches beyond sheet metal shield for piping operating below ambient air temperature.

FASTENER SYSTEMS

Verify suitability of fasteners in this article for use in lightweight concrete or concrete slabs less than 4 inches (100 mm) thick.

Powder-Actuated Fasteners:  Threaded-steel stud, for use in hardened portland cement concrete with pull-out, tension, and shear capacities appropriate for supported loads and building materials where used.

Mechanical-Expansion Anchors:  Insert-wedge-type, zinc-coated steel anchors, for use in hardened portland cement concrete; with pull-out, tension, and shear capacities appropriate for supported loads and building materials where used.

PIPE STANDS

Pipe stands in this article require calculating and detailing at each use.

General Requirements for Pipe Stands:  Shop- or field-fabricated assemblies made of manufactured corrosion-resistant components to support roof-mounted piping.

Compact Pipe Stand:  One-piece plastic unit with integral-rod roller, pipe clamps, or V-shaped cradle to support pipe, for roof installation without membrane penetration.

Low-Type, Single-Pipe Stand:  One-piece plastic base unit with plastic roller, for roof installation without membrane penetration.

High-Type, Single-Pipe Stand:

Description:  Assembly of base, vertical and horizontal members, and pipe support, for roof installation without membrane penetration.

Base:  Plastic.

Vertical Members:  Two or more cadmium-plated-steel or stainless-steel, continuous-thread rods.

Horizontal Member:  Cadmium-plated-steel or stainless-steel rod with plastic or stainless-steel, roller-type pipe support.

High-Type, Multiple-Pipe Stand:

Description:  Assembly of bases, vertical and horizontal members, and pipe supports, for roof installation without membrane penetration.

Bases:  One or more; plastic.

Vertical Members:  Two or more protective-coated-steel channels.

Horizontal Member:  Protective-coated-steel channel.

Pipe Supports:  Galvanized-steel, clevis-type pipe hangers.

Curb-Mounted-Type Pipe Stands:  Shop- or field-fabricated pipe supports made from structural-steel shapes, continuous-thread rods, and rollers, for mounting on permanent stationary roof curb.

EQUIPMENT SUPPORTS

Equipment support in paragraph below requires calculating and detailing at each use.

Description:  Welded, shop- or field-fabricated equipment support made from structural carbon-steel shapes.

MISCELLANEOUS MATERIALS

Structural Steel:  ASTM A 36/A 36M, carbon-steel plates, shapes, and bars; black and galvanized.

Grout:  ASTM C 1107, factory-mixed and -packaged, dry, hydraulic-cement, nonshrink and nonmetallic grout; suitable for interior and exterior applications.

Properties:  Nonstaining, noncorrosive, and nongaseous.

Design Mix:  5000-psi, 28-day compressive strength.

EXECUTION

HANGER AND SUPPORT INSTALLATION

Metal Pipe-Hanger Installation:  Comply with MSS SP-69 and MSS SP-89.  Install hangers, supports, clamps, and attachments as required to properly support piping from the building structure.

Trapeze pipe hanger in first paragraph below requires calculating and detailing at each use.

Metal Trapeze Pipe-Hanger Installation:  Comply with MSS SP-69 and MSS SP-89.  Arrange for grouping of parallel runs of horizontal piping, and support together on field-fabricated trapeze pipe hangers.

Pipes of Various Sizes:  Support together and space trapezes for smallest pipe size or install intermediate supports for smaller diameter pipes as specified for individual pipe hangers.

Field fabricate from ASTM A 36/A 36M, carbon-steel shapes selected for loads being supported.  Weld steel according to AWS D1.1/D1.1M.

Metal framing system in first paragraph below requires calculating and detailing at each use.

Metal Framing System Installation:  Arrange for grouping of parallel runs of piping, and support together on field-assembled metal framing systems.

Fiberglass strut system in first paragraph below requires calculating and detailing at each use.

Fiberglass Strut System Installation:  Arrange for grouping of parallel runs of piping, and support together on field-assembled fiberglass struts.

Thermal-Hanger Shield Installation:  Install in pipe hanger or shield for insulated piping.

Fastener System Installation:

Verify suitability of fasteners in two subparagraphs below for use in lightweight concrete or concrete slabs less than 4 inches (100 mm) thick.

Install powder-actuated fasteners for use in lightweight concrete or concrete slabs less than 4 inches thick in concrete after concrete is placed and completely cured.  Use operators that are licensed by powder-actuated tool manufacturer.  Install fasteners according to powder-actuated tool manufacturer's operating manual.

Install mechanical-expansion anchors in concrete after concrete is placed and completely cured.  Install fasteners according to manufacturer's written instructions.

Pipe stand in first paragraph below requires calculating and detailing at each use.

Pipe Stand Installation:

Pipe Stand Types except Curb-Mounted Type:  Assemble components and mount on smooth roof surface.  Do not penetrate roof membrane.

Curb-Mounted-Type Pipe Stands:  Assemble components or fabricate pipe stand and mount on permanent, stationary roof curb.

Install hangers and supports complete with necessary attachments, inserts, bolts, rods, nuts, washers, and other accessories.

Equipment support in first paragraph below requires calculating and detailing at each use.

Equipment Support Installation:  Fabricate from welded-structural-steel shapes.

Install hangers and supports to allow controlled thermal and seismic movement of piping systems, to permit freedom of movement between pipe anchors, and to facilitate action of expansion joints, expansion loops, expansion bends, and similar units.

Install lateral bracing with pipe hangers and supports to prevent swaying.

Install building attachments within concrete slabs or attach to structural steel.  Install additional attachments at concentrated loads, including valves, flanges, and strainers, NPS 2-1/2 and larger and at changes in direction of piping.  Install concrete inserts before concrete is placed; fasten inserts to forms and install reinforcing bars through openings at top of inserts.

Load Distribution:  Install hangers and supports so that piping live and dead loads and stresses from movement will not be transmitted to connected equipment.

Pipe Slopes:  Install hangers and supports to provide indicated pipe slopes and to not exceed maximum pipe deflections allowed by ASME B31.9 for building services piping.

Insulated Piping:

Specify parts in first three subparagraphs below as galvanized or painted, as required.  Other materials are available in place of wooden blocks.

Attach clamps and spacers to piping.

Piping Operating above Ambient Air Temperature:  Clamp may project through insulation.

Piping Operating below Ambient Air Temperature:  Use thermal-hanger shield insert with clamp sized to match OD of insert.

Do not exceed pipe stress limits allowed by ASME B31.9 for building services piping.

Install MSS SP-58, Type 39, protection saddles if insulation without vapor barrier is indicated.  Fill interior voids with insulation that matches adjoining insulation.

Option:  Thermal-hanger shield inserts may be used.  Include steel weight-distribution plate for pipe NPS 4 and larger if pipe is installed on rollers.

High-compressive-strength inserts may permit use of shorter shields or shields with less arc span.  Revise first subparagraph below to suit Project.

Install MSS SP-58, Type 40, protective shields on cold piping with vapor barrier.  Shields shall span an arc of 180 degrees.

Option:  Thermal-hanger shield inserts may be used.  Include steel weight-distribution plate for pipe NPS 4 and larger if pipe is installed on rollers.

Shield Dimensions for Pipe:  Not less than the following:

NPS 1/4 to NPS 3-1/2:  12 inches long and 0.048 inch thick.

NPS 4:  12 inches long and 0.06 inch thick.

NPS 5 and NPS 6:  18 inches long and 0.06 inch thick.

NPS 8 to NPS 14:  24 inches long and 0.075 inch thick.

NPS 16 to NPS 24:  24 inches long and 0.105 inch thick.

Pipes NPS 8 and Larger:  Include wood or reinforced calcium-silicate-insulation inserts of length at least as long as protective shield.

Thermal-Hanger Shields:  Install with insulation same thickness as piping insulation.

EQUIPMENT SUPPORTS

Fabricate structural-steel stands to suspend equipment from structure overhead or to support equipment above floor.

Grouting:  Place grout under supports for equipment and make bearing surface smooth.

Provide lateral bracing, to prevent swaying, for equipment supports.

METAL FABRICATIONS

Cut, drill, and fit miscellaneous metal fabrications for trapeze pipe hangers and equipment supports.

Fit exposed connections together to form hairline joints.  Field weld connections that cannot be shop welded because of shipping size limitations.

Field Welding:  Comply with AWS D1.1/D1.1M procedures for shielded, metal arc welding; appearance and quality of welds; and methods used in correcting welding work; and with the following:

Use materials and methods that minimize distortion and develop strength and corrosion resistance of base metals.

Obtain fusion without undercut or overlap.

Remove welding flux immediately.

Finish welds at exposed connections so no roughness shows after finishing and so contours of welded surfaces match adjacent contours.

ADJUSTING

Hanger Adjustments:  Adjust hangers to distribute loads equally on attachments and to achieve indicated slope of pipe.

Trim excess length of continuous-thread hanger and support rods to 1-1/2 inches.

PAINTING

Touchup:  Clean field welds and abraded areas of shop paint.  Paint exposed areas immediately after erecting hangers and supports.  Use same materials as used for shop painting.  Comply with SSPC-PA 1 requirements for touching up field-painted surfaces.

Apply paint by brush or spray to provide a minimum dry film thickness of 2.0 mils.

Galvanized Surfaces:  Clean welds, bolted connections, and abraded areas and apply galvanizing-repair paint to comply with ASTM A 780.

HANGER AND SUPPORT SCHEDULE

Specific hanger and support requirements are in Sections specifying piping systems and equipment.

Comply with MSS SP-69 for pipe-hanger selections and applications that are not specified in piping system Sections.

Use hangers and supports with galvanized metallic coatings for piping and equipment that will not have field-applied finish.

Use nonmetallic coatings on attachments for electrolytic protection where attachments are in direct contact with copper tubing.

Use carbon-steel pipe hangers and supports and metal framing systems and attachments for general service applications.

Use stainless-steel pipe hangers and stainless-steel attachments for hostile environment applications.

Use copper-plated pipe hangers and copper attachments for copper piping and tubing.

Use padded hangers for piping that is subject to scratching.

Use thermal-hanger shield inserts for insulated piping and tubing.

Horizontal-Piping Hangers and Supports:  Unless otherwise indicated and except as specified in piping system Sections, install the following types:

Adjustable, Steel Clevis Hangers (MSS Type 1):  For suspension of noninsulated or insulated, stationary pipes NPS 1/2 to NPS 30.

Yoke-Type Pipe Clamps (MSS Type 2):  For suspension of up to 1050 deg F, pipes NPS 4 to NPS 24, requiring up to 4 inches of insulation.

Carbon- or Alloy-Steel, Double-Bolt Pipe Clamps (MSS Type 3):  For suspension of pipes NPS 3/4 to NPS 36, requiring clamp flexibility and up to 4 inches of insulation.

Steel Pipe Clamps (MSS Type 4):  For suspension of cold and hot pipes NPS 1/2 to NPS 24 if little or no insulation is required.

Pipe Hangers (MSS Type 5):  For suspension of pipes NPS 1/2 to NPS 4, to allow off-center closure for hanger installation before pipe erection.

Adjustable, Swivel Split- or Solid-Ring Hangers (MSS Type 6):  For suspension of noninsulated, stationary pipes NPS 3/4 to NPS 8.

Adjustable, Steel Band Hangers (MSS Type 7):  For suspension of noninsulated, stationary pipes NPS 1/2 to NPS 8.

Adjustable Band Hangers (MSS Type 9):  For suspension of noninsulated, stationary pipes NPS 1/2 to NPS 8.

Adjustable, Swivel-Ring Band Hangers (MSS Type 10):  For suspension of noninsulated, stationary pipes NPS 1/2 to NPS 8.

Split Pipe Ring with or without Turnbuckle Hangers (MSS Type 11):  For suspension of noninsulated, stationary pipes NPS 3/8 to NPS 8.

Extension Hinged or Two-Bolt Split Pipe Clamps (MSS Type 12):  For suspension of noninsulated, stationary pipes NPS 3/8 to NPS 3.

U-Bolts (MSS Type 24):  For support of heavy pipes NPS 1/2 to NPS 30.

Clips (MSS Type 26):  For support of insulated pipes not subject to expansion or contraction.

Pipe Saddle Supports (MSS Type 36):  For support of pipes NPS 4 to NPS 36, with steel-pipe base stanchion support and cast-iron floor flange or carbon-steel plate.

Pipe Stanchion Saddles (MSS Type 37):  For support of pipes NPS 4 to NPS 36, with steel-pipe base stanchion support and cast-iron floor flange or carbon-steel plate, and with U-bolt to retain pipe.

Adjustable Pipe Saddle Supports (MSS Type 38):  For stanchion-type support for pipes NPS 2-1/2 to NPS 36 if vertical adjustment is required, with steel-pipe base stanchion support and cast-iron floor flange.

Single-Pipe Rolls (MSS Type 41):  For suspension of pipes NPS 1 to NPS 30, from two rods if longitudinal movement caused by expansion and contraction might occur.

Adjustable Roller Hangers (MSS Type 43):  For suspension of pipes NPS 2-1/2 to NPS 24, from single rod if horizontal movement caused by expansion and contraction might occur.

Complete Pipe Rolls (MSS Type 44):  For support of pipes NPS 2 to NPS 42 if longitudinal movement caused by expansion and contraction might occur but vertical adjustment is not necessary.

Pipe Roll and Plate Units (MSS Type 45):  For support of pipes NPS 2 to NPS 24 if small horizontal movement caused by expansion and contraction might occur and vertical adjustment is not necessary.

Adjustable Pipe Roll and Base Units (MSS Type 46):  For support of pipes NPS 2 to NPS 30 if vertical and lateral adjustment during installation might be required in addition to expansion and contraction.

Vertical-Piping Clamps:  Unless otherwise indicated and except as specified in piping system Sections, install the following types:

Extension Pipe or Riser Clamps (MSS Type 8):  For support of pipe risers NPS 3/4 to NPS 24.

Carbon- or Alloy-Steel Riser Clamps (MSS Type 42):  For support of pipe risers NPS 3/4 to NPS 24 if longer ends are required for riser clamps.

Hanger-Rod Attachments:  Unless otherwise indicated and except as specified in piping system Sections, install the following types:

Steel Turnbuckles (MSS Type 13):  For adjustment up to 6 inches for heavy loads.

Steel Clevises (MSS Type 14):  For 120 to 450 deg F piping installations.

Swivel Turnbuckles (MSS Type 15):  For use with MSS Type 11, split pipe rings.

Malleable-Iron Sockets (MSS Type 16):  For attaching hanger rods to various types of building attachments.

Steel Weldless Eye Nuts (MSS Type 17):  For 120 to 450 deg F piping installations.

Building Attachments:  Unless otherwise indicated and except as specified in piping system Sections, install the following types:

Steel or Malleable Concrete Inserts (MSS Type 18):  For upper attachment to suspend pipe hangers from concrete ceiling.

Top-Beam C-Clamps (MSS Type 19):  For use under roof installations with bar-joist construction, to attach to top flange of structural shape.

Side-Beam or Channel Clamps (MSS Type 20):  For attaching to bottom flange of beams, channels, or angles.

Center-Beam Clamps (MSS Type 21):  For attaching to center of bottom flange of beams.

Welded Beam Attachments (MSS Type 22):  For attaching to bottom of beams if loads are considerable and rod sizes are large.

C-Clamps (MSS Type 23):  For structural shapes.

Top-Beam Clamps (MSS Type 25):  For top of beams if hanger rod is required tangent to flange edge.

Side-Beam Clamps (MSS Type 27):  For bottom of steel I-beams.

Steel-Beam Clamps with Eye Nuts (MSS Type 28):  For attaching to bottom of steel I-beams for heavy loads.

Linked-Steel Clamps with Eye Nuts (MSS Type 29):  For attaching to bottom of steel I-beams for heavy loads, with link extensions.

Malleable-Beam Clamps with Extension Pieces (MSS Type 30):  For attaching to structural steel.

Welded-Steel Brackets:  For support of pipes from below or for suspending from above by using clip and rod.  Use one of the following for indicated loads:

Light (MSS Type 31):  750 lb.

Medium (MSS Type 32):  1500 lb.

Heavy (MSS Type 33):  3000 lb.

Side-Beam Brackets (MSS Type 34):  For sides of steel or wooden beams.

Plate Lugs (MSS Type 57):  For attaching to steel beams if flexibility at beam is required.

Horizontal Travelers (MSS Type 58):  For supporting piping systems subject to linear horizontal movement where headroom is limited.

Saddles and Shields:  Unless otherwise indicated and except as specified in piping system Sections, install the following types:

Steel-Pipe-Covering Protection Saddles (MSS Type 39):  To fill interior voids with insulation that matches adjoining insulation.

Protection Shields (MSS Type 40):  Of length recommended in writing by manufacturer to prevent crushing insulation.

Thermal-Hanger Shield Inserts:  For supporting insulated pipe.

Spring Hangers and Supports:  Unless otherwise indicated and except as specified in piping system Sections, install the following types:

Restraint-Control Devices (MSS Type 47):  Where indicated to control piping movement.

Spring Cushions (MSS Type 48):  For light loads if vertical movement does not exceed 1-1/4 inches.

Spring-Cushion Roll Hangers (MSS Type 49):  For equipping Type 41, roll hanger with springs.

Spring Sway Braces (MSS Type 50):  To retard sway, shock, vibration, or thermal expansion in piping systems.

Variable-Spring Hangers (MSS Type 51):  Preset to indicated load and limit variability factor to 25 percent to allow expansion and contraction of piping system from hanger.

Variable-Spring Base Supports (MSS Type 52):  Preset to indicated load and limit variability factor to 25 percent to allow expansion and contraction of piping system from base support.

Variable-Spring Trapeze Hangers (MSS Type 53):  Preset to indicated load and limit variability factor to 25 percent to allow expansion and contraction of piping system from trapeze support.

Constant Supports:  For critical piping stress and if necessary to avoid transfer of stress from one support to another support, critical terminal, or connected equipment.  Include auxiliary stops for erection, hydrostatic test, and load-adjustment capability.  These supports include the following types:

Horizontal (MSS Type 54):  Mounted horizontally.

Vertical (MSS Type 55):  Mounted vertically.

Trapeze (MSS Type 56):  Two vertical-type supports and one trapeze member.

Comply with MSS SP-69 for trapeze pipe-hanger selections and applications that are not specified in piping system Sections.

Comply with MFMA-103 for metal framing system selections and applications that are not specified in piping system Sections.

Use mechanical-expansion anchors instead of building attachments where required in concrete construction.

END OF SECTION 230529