GENERAL

RELATED DOCUMENTS

Drawings and general provisions of the Contract, including General and Supplementary Conditions and Division 01 Specification Sections, apply to this Section.

SUMMARY

Section includes insulating the following duct services:

Indoor, concealed supply and outdoor air.

Indoor, exposed supply and outdoor air.

Indoor, concealed return located in unconditioned space.

Indoor, exposed return located in unconditioned space.

Indoor, concealed, Type I, commercial, kitchen hood exhaust.

Indoor, exposed, Type I, commercial, kitchen hood exhaust.

Indoor, concealed oven and warewash exhaust.

Indoor, exposed oven and warewash exhaust.

Indoor, exposed exhaust between isolation damper and penetration of building exterior.

Outdoor, concealed supply and return.

Outdoor, exposed supply and return.

Related Sections:

Section 230719 "HVAC Piping Insulation."

Section 233113 "Metal Ducts" for duct liners.

ACTION SUBMITTALS

Product Data:  For each type of product indicated.  Include thermal conductivity, water-vapor permeance thickness, and jackets (both factory- and field-applied if any).

LEED Submittals:

"Product Data for Credit IEQ 4.1" Subparagraph below applies to LEED-NC, LEED-CI, and LEED-CS; coordinate with requirements for adhesives and sealants.

Product Data for Credit IEQ 4.1:  For adhesives and sealants, documentation including printed statement of VOC content.

"Laboratory Test Reports for Credit IEQ 4" Subparagraph below applies to LEED for Schools.

Laboratory Test Reports for Credit IEQ 4:  For adhesives and sealants, documentation indicating that products comply with the testing and product requirements of the California Department of Health Services' "Standard Practice for the Testing of Volatile Organic Emissions from Various Sources Using Small-Scale Environmental Chambers."

Shop Drawings:  Include plans, elevations, sections, details, and attachments to other work.

Detail application of protective shields, saddles, and inserts at hangers for each type of insulation and hanger.

Detail insulation application at elbows, fittings, dampers, specialties and flanges for each type of insulation.

Detail application of field-applied jackets.

Detail application at linkages of control devices.

Samples:  For each type of insulation and jacket indicated.  Identify each Sample, describing product and intended use.  Sample sizes are as follows:

Sheet Form Insulation Materials:  12 inches square.

Sheet Jacket Materials:  12 inches square.

Manufacturer's Color Charts:  For products where color is specified, show the full range of colors available for each type of finish material.

INFORMATIONAL SUBMITTALS

Qualification Data:  For qualified Installer.

Material Test Reports:  From a qualified testing agency acceptable to authorities having jurisdiction indicating, interpreting, and certifying test results for compliance of insulation materials, sealers, attachments, cements, and jackets, with requirements indicated.  Include dates of tests and test methods employed.

Field quality-control reports.

QUALITY ASSURANCE

Installer Qualifications:  Skilled mechanics who have successfully completed an apprenticeship program or another craft training program certified by the Department of Labor, Bureau of Apprenticeship and Training.

Surface-Burning Characteristics:  For insulation and related materials, as determined by testing identical products according to ASTM E 84, by a testing agency acceptable to authorities having jurisdiction.  Factory label insulation and jacket materials and adhesive, mastic, tapes, and cement material containers, with appropriate markings of applicable testing agency.

Insulation Installed Indoors:  Flame-spread index of 25 or less, and smoke-developed index of 50 or less.

Insulation Installed Outdoors:  Flame-spread index of 75 or less, and smoke-developed index of 150 or less.

DELIVERY, STORAGE, AND HANDLING

Retain this article to require shipping container markings.  Container marking is an option in ASTM standards; default condition does not include the marking in this article unless specified in the Contract.

Packaging:  Insulation material containers shall be marked by manufacturer with appropriate ASTM standard designation, type and grade, and maximum use temperature.

COORDINATION

Coordinate sizes and locations of supports, hangers, and insulation shields specified in Section 230529 "Hangers and Supports for HVAC Piping and Equipment."

Coordinate clearance requirements with duct Installer for duct insulation application.  Before preparing ductwork Shop Drawings, establish and maintain clearance requirements for installation of insulation and field-applied jackets and finishes and for space required for maintenance.

Coordinate installation and testing of heat tracing.

SCHEDULING

Schedule insulation application after pressure testing systems and, where required, after installing and testing heat tracing.  Insulation application may begin on segments that have satisfactory test results.

Complete installation and concealment of plastic materials as rapidly as possible in each area of construction.

PRODUCTS

INSULATION MATERIALS

Comply with requirements in "Duct Insulation Schedule, General," "Indoor Duct and Plenum Insulation Schedule," and "Aboveground, Outdoor Duct and Plenum Insulation Schedule" articles for where insulating materials shall be applied.

Products shall not contain asbestos, lead, mercury, or mercury compounds.

Products that come in contact with stainless steel shall have a leachable chloride content of less than 50 ppm when tested according to ASTM C 871.

Insulation materials for use on austenitic stainless steel shall be qualified as acceptable according to ASTM C 795.

Foam insulation materials shall not use CFC or HCFC blowing agents in the manufacturing process.

"Flexible Elastomeric Insulation" Paragraph below is unsuitable for temperatures lower than minus 70 deg F (minus 57 deg C) and higher than 220 deg F (104 deg C).

For operating temperatures higher than 250 deg F (121 deg C), use blanket insulation in first paragraph below.  Retain ASTM C 1290 types as follows:  Type I for insulation without jackets, Type II for insulation with vinyl jackets, and Type III for insulation with FSK or FSP jackets.

Mineral-Fiber Blanket Insulation:  Mineral or glass fibers bonded with a thermosetting resin.  Comply with ASTM C 553, Type II and ASTM C 1290, Type III with factory-applied FSK jacket.  Factory-applied jacket requirements are specified in "Factory-Applied Jackets" Article.

Products:  Subject to compliance with requirements, provide one of the following:

CertainTeed Corp.; SoftTouch Duct Wrap.

Johns Manville; Microlite.

Knauf Insulation; Friendly Feel Duct Wrap.

Owens Corning; SOFTR All-Service Duct Wrap.

For operating temperatures higher than 250 deg F (121 deg C), use board insulation in first paragraph below.  The most common jacket for ductwork and plenum applications is FSK.

Mineral-Fiber Board Insulation:  Mineral or glass fibers bonded with a thermosetting resin.  Comply with ASTM C 612, Type IA or Type IB.  For duct and plenum applications, provide insulation with factory-applied FSK jacket.  Factory-applied jacket requirements are specified in "Factory-Applied Jackets" Article.

Products:  Subject to compliance with requirements, provide one of the following:

CertainTeed Corp.; Commercial Board.

Fibrex Insulations Inc.; FBX.

Johns Manville; 800 Series Spin-Glas.

Knauf Insulation; Insulation Board.

Manson Insulation Inc.; AK Board.

Owens Corning; Fiberglas 700 Series.

Pipe and tank insulation is used for large-diameter piping and vessels.  ASJ is commonly used.

Mineral-Fiber, Pipe and Tank Insulation:  Mineral or glass fibers bonded with a thermosetting resin.  Semirigid board material with factory-applied [FSK jacket] complying with ASTM C 1393, Type II or Type IIIA Category 2, or with properties similar to ASTM C 612, Type IB.  Nominal density is 2.5 lb/cu. ft. or more.  Thermal conductivity (k-value) at 100 deg F is 0.29 Btu x in./h x sq. ft. x deg F or less.  Factory-applied jacket requirements are specified in "Factory-Applied Jackets" Article.

Products:  Subject to compliance with requirements, provide one of the following:

CertainTeed Corp.; CrimpWrap.

Johns Manville; MicroFlex.

Knauf Insulation; Pipe and Tank Insulation.

Manson Insulation Inc.; AK Flex.

Owens Corning; Fiberglas Pipe and Tank Insulation.

FIRE-RATED INSULATION SYSTEMS

Retain this article for fire-rated insulation, which is sometimes used in lieu of fire-rated assemblies.  A common application is for Type I, commercial, kitchen hood exhaust ductwork.  See Evaluations.

Fire-Rated Board:  Structural-grade, press-molded, xonolite calcium silicate, fireproofing board suitable for operating temperatures up to 1700 deg F.  Comply with ASTM C 656, Type II, Grade 6.  Tested and certified to provide a [1] [2]-hour fire rating by an NRTL acceptable to authorities having jurisdiction.

Products:  Subject to compliance with requirements, provide one of the following:

Johns Manville; Super Firetemp M.

Fire-Rated Blanket:  High-temperature, flexible, blanket insulation with FSK jacket that is tested and certified to provide a [1] [2]-hour fire rating by an NRTL acceptable to authorities having jurisdiction.

Products:  Subject to compliance with requirements, provide one of the following:

CertainTeed Corp.; FlameChek.

Johns Manville; Firetemp Wrap.

Nelson Fire Stop Products; Nelson FSB Flameshield Blanket.

Thermal Ceramics; FireMaster Duct Wrap.

3M; Fire Barrier Wrap Products.

Unifrax Corporation; FyreWrap.

ADHESIVES

Military Specification in this article was the only standard available when this Section was written.  MIL-A-3316C was last updated in October 1987.

Materials shall be compatible with insulation materials, jackets, and substrates and for bonding insulation to itself and to surfaces to be insulated unless otherwise indicated.

Product attributes in first paragraph below are based on Foster Brand products; there are variations among manufacturers.

Mineral-Fiber Adhesive:  Comply with MIL-A-3316C, Class 2, Grade A.

Products:  Subject to compliance with requirements, provide one of the following:

Childers Brand, Specialty Construction Brands, Inc., a business of H. B. Fuller Company; CP-127.Eagle Bridges - Marathon Industries; 225.

Foster Brand, Specialty Construction Brands, Inc., a business of H. B. Fuller Company; 85-60/85-70.Mon-Eco Industries, Inc.; 22-25.

One or both subparagraphs below may be required to comply with Project requirements or authorities having jurisdiction.  Retain first subparagraph below if required for LEED-NC, LEED-CI, or LEED-CS Credit IEQ 4.1.

For indoor applications, adhesive shall have a VOC content of 80 g/L or less when calculated according to 40 CFR 59, Subpart D (EPA Method 24).

Adhesive shall comply with the testing and product requirements of the California Department of Health Services' "Standard Practice for the Testing of Volatile Organic Emissions from Various Sources Using Small-Scale Environmental Chambers."

ASJ Adhesive, and FSK Jacket Adhesive:  Comply with MIL-A-3316C, Class 2, Grade A for bonding insulation jacket lap seams and joints.

Products:  Subject to compliance with requirements, provide one of the following:

Childers Brand, Specialty Construction Brands, Inc., a business of H. B. Fuller Company; CP-82.

Eagle Bridges - Marathon Industries; 225.

Foster Brand, Specialty Construction Brands, Inc., a business of H. B. Fuller Company; 85-50.Mon-Eco Industries, Inc.; 22-25.

One or both subparagraphs below may be required to comply with Project requirements or authorities having jurisdiction.  Retain first subparagraph below if required for LEED-NC, LEED-CI, or LEED-CS Credit IEQ 4.1.

For indoor applications, adhesive shall have a VOC content of 50 g/L or less when calculated according to 40 CFR 59, Subpart D (EPA Method 24).

Adhesive shall comply with the testing and product requirements of the California Department of Health Services' "Standard Practice for the Testing of Volatile Organic Emissions from Various Sources Using Small-Scale Environmental Chambers."

MASTICS

The industry does not have a clear definition that categorizes mastics into vapor barriers, vapor retarders, and breather mastics.  Specification follows the nomenclature used by Foster.  Products with a perm rating of 0.1 and lower are considered vapor barriers.  Products with a perm rating greater than 0.1 and less than 1.0 are considered vapor retarders.  Products with a perm rating greater than 1.0 are called "breathable."  Consider ambient conditions and operating temperatures when selecting a mastic.  Consider using water-based mastics for environmental reasons.

LEED Credit IEQ 4.1 does not address requirements for mastics.

Materials shall be compatible with insulation materials, jackets, and substrates; comply with MIL-PRF-19565C, Type II.

For indoor applications, use mastics that have a VOC content of 50 g/L or less when calculated according to 40 CFR 59, Subpart D (EPA Method 24).

Verify that products listed comply with water-vapor permeance.  Require proof of performance and certified test reports from vapor-barrier mastic manufacturer to support product literature claims.

Vapor-Barrier Mastic:  Water based; suitable for indoor use on below ambient services.

Products:  Subject to compliance with requirements, provide one of the following:

Foster Brand, Specialty Construction Brands, Inc., a business of H. B. Fuller Company; 30-80/30-90.

Vimasco Corporation; 749.

Water-Vapor Permeance:  ASTM E 96/E 96M, Procedure B, 0.013 perm at 43-mil dry film thickness.

Service Temperature Range:  Minus 20 to plus 180 deg F.

Solids Content:  ASTM D 1644, 58 percent by volume and 70 percent by weight.

Color:  White.

Breather Mastic:  Water based; suitable for indoor and outdoor use on above ambient services.

Products:  Subject to compliance with requirements, provide one of the following:

Childers Brand, Specialty Construction Brands, Inc., a business of H. B. Fuller Company; CP-10.

Eagle Bridges - Marathon Industries; 550.

Foster Brand, Specialty Construction Brands, Inc., a business of H. B. Fuller Company; 46-50.

Mon-Eco Industries, Inc.; 55-50.

Vimasco Corporation; WC-1/WC-5.

Water-Vapor Permeance:  ASTM F 1249, 1.8 perms at 0.0625-inch dry film thickness.

Service Temperature Range:  Minus 20 to plus 180 deg F.

Solids Content:  60 percent by volume and 66 percent by weight.

Color:  White.

LAGGING ADHESIVES

LEED Credit IEQ 4.1 does not address requirements for lagging adhesives.

Description:  Comply with MIL-A-3316C, Class I, Grade A and shall be compatible with insulation materials, jackets, and substrates.

For indoor applications, use lagging adhesives that have a VOC content of 50 g/L or less when calculated according to 40 CFR 59, Subpart D (EPA Method 24).

Products:  Subject to compliance with requirements, provide one of the following:

Childers Brand, Specialty Construction Brands, Inc., a business of H. B. Fuller Company; CP-50 AHV2.Foster Brand, Specialty Construction Brands, Inc., a business of H. B. Fuller Company; 30-36.

Vimasco Corporation; 713 and 714.

Fire-resistant, water-based lagging adhesive and coating for use indoors to adhere fire-resistant lagging cloths over duct insulation.

Service Temperature Range:  0 to plus 180 deg F.

Color:  White.

SEALANTS

Materials in first paragraph below are for sealing metal jacket seams and joints.

FSK and Metal Jacket Flashing Sealants:

Products:  Subject to compliance with requirements, provide one of the following:

Childers Brand, Specialty Construction Brands, Inc., a business of H. B. Fuller Company; CP-76.Eagle Bridges - Marathon Industries; 405.

Foster Brand, Specialty Construction Brands, Inc., a business of H. B. Fuller Company; 95-44.

Mon-Eco Industries, Inc.; 44-05.

Materials shall be compatible with insulation materials, jackets, and substrates.

Fire- and water-resistant, flexible, elastomeric sealant.

Service Temperature Range:  Minus 40 to plus 250 deg F.

Color:  Aluminum.

One or both subparagraphs below may be required to comply with Project requirements or authorities having jurisdiction.  Retain first subparagraph below if required for LEED-NC, LEED-CI, or LEED-CS Credit IEQ 4.1.

For indoor applications, sealants shall have a VOC content of 420 g/L or less when calculated according to 40 CFR 59, Subpart D (EPA Method 24).

Sealants shall comply with the testing and product requirements of the California Department of Health Services' "Standard Practice for the Testing of Volatile Organic Emissions from Various Sources Using Small-Scale Environmental Chambers."

FACTORY-APPLIED JACKETS

Coordinate types of factory-applied jacket insulation materials selected and types of factory-applied jackets indicated in insulation system schedules.

For insulation materials with factory-applied jackets for use on applications above 140 deg F (60 deg C), specify sufficient insulation thickness to maintain outer surface temperature of insulation below 140 deg F (60 deg C).  140 deg F (60 deg C) surface temperature is set by OSHA for personnel protection.

Knauf is the only mineral-fiber insulation manufacturer that offers factory-applied FSP jacket for blanket insulation.  CertainTeed and Johns Manville offer a vinyl jacket, but it does not comply with ASTM C 1136.  Owens Corning does not offer an FSP or a vinyl product.

Insulation system schedules indicate factory-applied jackets on various applications.  When factory-applied jackets are indicated, comply with the following:

FSK Jacket:  Aluminum-foil, fiberglass-reinforced scrim with kraft-paper backing; complying with ASTM C 1136, Type II.

FIELD-APPLIED JACKETS

Insulation jackets in this article are for field application.  ASTM C 921, Type I, is for use over insulation on ducts operating at below ambient temperatures at least part of the time or where a vapor barrier is required.  ASTM C 921, Type II, is for use over insulation on ducts operating above ambient temperatures or where a vapor retarder is not required.

Field-applied jackets shall comply with ASTM C 921, Type I, unless otherwise indicated.

A properly sealed FSK jacket, common with most forms of factory-applied jackets for mineral-fiber insulation, complies with vapor-retarder requirements in ASTM C 921, Type I.

FSK Jacket:  Aluminum-foil-face, fiberglass-reinforced scrim with kraft-paper backing.

Although other thicknesses for PVC jackets are available, a flame-spread index of 25 and a smoke-developed index of 50 apply only to thicknesses of 30 mils (0.8 mm) and less.

TAPES

Product performance is based on products manufactured by Venture Tape; there are slight variations among manufacturers.

FSK Tape:  Foil-face, vapor-retarder tape matching factory-applied jacket with acrylic adhesive; complying with ASTM C 1136.

Products:  Subject to compliance with requirements, provide one of the following:

ABI, Ideal Tape Division; 491 AWF FSK.

Avery Dennison Corporation, Specialty Tapes Division; Fasson 0827.

Compac Corporation; 110 and 111.

Venture Tape; 1525 CW NT, 1528 CW, and 1528 CW/SQ.

Width:  3 inches.

Thickness:  6.5 mils.

Adhesion:  90 ounces force/inch in width.

Elongation:  2 percent.

Tensile Strength:  40 lbf/inch in width.

FSK Tape Disks and Squares:  Precut disks or squares of FSK tape.

SECUREMENTS

Bands:

Products:  Subject to compliance with requirements, provide one of the following:

ITW Insulation Systems; Gerrard Strapping and Seals.

RPR Products, Inc.; Insul-Mate Strapping, Seals, and Springs.

Wing seals are primarily used for fastening bands together.  Closed seals are occasionally used for large, 84-inch- (2130-mm-) diameter applications and where fastening bands are used with springs.  Wing seals are reusable; closed seals are not.

Stainless Steel:  ASTM A 167 or ASTM A 240/A 240M, Type 304; 0.015-inch-thick, 1/2 inch wide with wing seal or closed seal.

Springs are used for large, 84-inch- (2130-mm-) diameter applications and on applications with rapid changes in expansion and contraction.

Springs:  Twin spring set constructed of stainless steel with ends flat and slotted to accept metal bands.  Spring size determined by manufacturer for application.

Insulation Pins and Hangers:

Cupped-Head, Capacitor-Discharge-Weld Pins:  Copper- or zinc-coated steel pin, fully annealed for capacitor-discharge welding, 0.135-inch-diameter shank, length to suit depth of insulation indicated with integral 1-1/2-inch galvanized carbon-steel washer.

Products:  Subject to compliance with requirements, provide one of the following:

AGM Industries, Inc.; CHP-1.

GEMCO; Cupped Head Weld Pin.

Midwest Fasteners, Inc.; Cupped Head.

Nelson Stud Welding; CHP.

Insulation-Retaining Washers:  Self-locking washers formed from 0.016-inch- thick, galvanized-steel sheet, with beveled edge sized as required to hold insulation securely in place but not less than 1-1/2 inches in diameter.

Products:  Subject to compliance with requirements, provide one of the following:

AGM Industries, Inc.; RC-150.

GEMCO; R-150.

Midwest Fasteners, Inc.; WA-150.

Nelson Stud Welding; Speed Clips.

Protect ends with capped self-locking washers incorporating a spring steel insert to ensure permanent retention of cap in exposed locations.

Nonmetal Insulation-Retaining Washers:  Self-locking washers formed from 0.016-inch- thick nylon sheet, with beveled edge sized as required to hold insulation securely in place but not less than 1-1/2 inches in diameter.

Manufacturers:  Subject to compliance with requirements, provide products by one of the following:

GEMCO.

Midwest Fasteners, Inc.

Staples:  Outward-clinching insulation staples, nominal 3/4-inch- wide, stainless steel or Monel.

In paragraph below, stainless steel is the most common wire used and is best suited for all applications.

Wire:  0.062-inch soft-annealed, galvanized steel.

Manufacturers:  Subject to compliance with requirements, provide products by one of the following:

C & F Wire.

CORNER ANGLES

Aluminum Corner Angles:  0.040 inch thick, minimum 1 by 1 inch, aluminum according to ASTM B 209, Alloy 3003, 3005, 3105, or 5005; Temper H-14.

EXECUTION

EXAMINATION

Examine substrates and conditions for compliance with requirements for installation tolerances and other conditions affecting performance of insulation application.

Verify that systems to be insulated have been tested and are free of defects.

Verify that surfaces to be insulated are clean and dry.

Proceed with installation only after unsatisfactory conditions have been corrected.

PREPARATION

Surface Preparation:  Clean and dry surfaces to receive insulation.  Remove materials that will adversely affect insulation application.

GENERAL INSTALLATION REQUIREMENTS

Install insulation materials, accessories, and finishes with smooth, straight, and even surfaces; free of voids throughout the length of ducts and fittings.

Install insulation materials, vapor barriers or retarders, jackets, and thicknesses required for each item of duct system as specified in insulation system schedules.

Install accessories compatible with insulation materials and suitable for the service.  Install accessories that do not corrode, soften, or otherwise attack insulation or jacket in either wet or dry state.

Install insulation with longitudinal seams at top and bottom of horizontal runs.

Install multiple layers of insulation with longitudinal and end seams staggered.

Keep insulation materials dry during application and finishing.

Install insulation with tight longitudinal seams and end joints.  Bond seams and joints with adhesive recommended by insulation material manufacturer.

Install insulation with least number of joints practical.

Where vapor barrier is indicated, seal joints, seams, and penetrations in insulation at hangers, supports, anchors, and other projections with vapor-barrier mastic.

Install insulation continuously through hangers and around anchor attachments.

For insulation application where vapor barriers are indicated, extend insulation on anchor legs from point of attachment to supported item to point of attachment to structure.  Taper and seal ends at attachment to structure with vapor-barrier mastic.

Install insert materials and install insulation to tightly join the insert.  Seal insulation to insulation inserts with adhesive or sealing compound recommended by insulation material manufacturer.

Apply adhesives, mastics, and sealants at manufacturer's recommended coverage rate and wet and dry film thicknesses.

Install insulation with factory-applied jackets as follows:

Draw jacket tight and smooth.

Cover circumferential joints with 3-inch- wide strips, of same material as insulation jacket.  Secure strips with adhesive and outward clinching staples along both edges of strip, spaced 4 inches o.c.

Overlap jacket longitudinal seams at least 1-1/2 inches.  Clean and dry surface to receive self-sealing lap.  Staple laps with outward clinching staples along edge at 2 inches o.c.

For below ambient services, apply vapor-barrier mastic over staples.

Cover joints and seams with tape, according to insulation material manufacturer's written instructions, to maintain vapor seal.

Where vapor barriers are indicated, apply vapor-barrier mastic on seams and joints and at ends adjacent to duct flanges and fittings.

Cut insulation in a manner to avoid compressing insulation more than 75 percent of its nominal thickness.

Finish installation with systems at operating conditions.  Repair joint separations and cracking due to thermal movement.

Repair damaged insulation facings by applying same facing material over damaged areas.  Extend patches at least 4 inches beyond damaged areas.  Adhere, staple, and seal patches similar to butt joints.

PENETRATIONS

Insulation Installation at Roof Penetrations:  Install insulation continuously through roof penetrations.

Seal penetrations with flashing sealant.

For applications requiring only indoor insulation, terminate insulation above roof surface and seal with joint sealant.  For applications requiring indoor and outdoor insulation, install insulation for outdoor applications tightly joined to indoor insulation ends.  Seal joint with joint sealant.

Extend jacket of outdoor insulation outside roof flashing at least 2 inches below top of roof flashing.

Seal jacket to roof flashing with flashing sealant.

Insulation Installation at Aboveground Exterior Wall Penetrations:  Install insulation continuously through wall penetrations.

Seal penetrations with flashing sealant.

For applications requiring only indoor insulation, terminate insulation inside wall surface and seal with joint sealant.  For applications requiring indoor and outdoor insulation, install insulation for outdoor applications tightly joined to indoor insulation ends.  Seal joint with joint sealant.

Extend jacket of outdoor insulation outside wall flashing and overlap wall flashing at least 2 inches.

Seal jacket to wall flashing with flashing sealant.

Insulation Installation at Interior Wall and Partition Penetrations (That Are Not Fire Rated):  Install insulation continuously through walls and partitions.

Insulation Installation at Fire-Rated Wall and Partition Penetrations:  Terminate insulation at fire damper sleeves for fire-rated wall and partition penetrations.  Externally insulate damper sleeves to match adjacent insulation and overlap duct insulation at least 2 inches.

Comply with requirements in Section 078413 "Penetration Firestopping"irestopping and fire-resistive joint sealers.

Insulation Installation at Floor Penetrations:

Duct:  For penetrations through fire-rated assemblies, terminate insulation at fire damper sleeves and externally insulate damper sleeve beyond floor to match adjacent duct insulation.  Overlap damper sleeve and duct insulation at least 2 inches.

Seal penetrations through fire-rated assemblies.  Comply with requirements in Section 078413 "Penetration Firestopping."

INSTALLATION OF MINERAL-FIBER INSULATION

Blanket Insulation Installation on Ducts and Plenums:  Secure with adhesive and insulation pins.

In first subparagraph below, many manufacturers do not recommend 100 percent coverage of adhesive because of the effect on the overall insulation system's fire-performance characteristics.  Verify application coverage recommendations with insulation manufacturer.

Apply adhesives according to manufacturer's recommended coverage rates per unit area, for 100 percent coverage of duct and plenum surfaces.

Revise first subparagraph below to allow adhesive to be omitted from top surface of horizontal rectangular ducts.

Apply adhesive to entire circumference of ducts and to all surfaces of fittings and transitions.

Install either capacitor-discharge-weld pins and speed washers or cupped-head, capacitor-discharge-weld pins on sides and bottom of horizontal ducts and sides of vertical ducts as follows:

On duct sides with dimensions 18 inches and smaller, place pins along longitudinal centerline of duct.  Space 3 inches maximum from insulation end joints, and 16 inches o.c.

On duct sides with dimensions larger than 18 inches, place pins 16 inches o.c. each way, and 3 inches maximum from insulation joints.  Install additional pins to hold insulation tightly against surface at cross bracing.

Pins may be omitted from top surface of horizontal, rectangular ducts and plenums.

Do not overcompress insulation during installation.

Impale insulation over pins and attach speed washers.

Cut excess portion of pins extending beyond speed washers or bend parallel with insulation surface.  Cover exposed pins and washers with tape matching insulation facing.

For ducts and plenums with surface temperatures below ambient, install a continuous unbroken vapor barrier.  Create a facing lap for longitudinal seams and end joints with insulation by removing 2 inches from one edge and one end of insulation segment.  Secure laps to adjacent insulation section with 1/2-inch outward-clinching staples, 1 inch o.c.  Install vapor barrier consisting of factory- or field-applied jacket, adhesive, vapor-barrier mastic, and sealant at joints, seams, and protrusions.

Repair punctures, tears, and penetrations with tape or mastic to maintain vapor-barrier seal.

Install vapor stops for ductwork and plenums operating below 50 deg F at 18-foot intervals.  Vapor stops shall consist of vapor-barrier mastic applied in a Z-shaped pattern over insulation face, along butt end of insulation, and over the surface.  Cover insulation face and surface to be insulated a width equal to two times the insulation thickness, but not less than 3 inches.

Overlap unfaced blankets a minimum of 2 inches on longitudinal seams and end joints.  At end joints, secure with steel bands spaced a maximum of 18 inches o.c.

Install insulation on rectangular duct elbows and transitions with a full insulation section for each surface.  Install insulation on round and flat-oval duct elbows with individually mitered gores cut to fit the elbow.

Insulate duct stiffeners, hangers, and flanges that protrude beyond insulation surface with 6-inch- wide strips of same material used to insulate duct.  Secure on alternating sides of stiffener, hanger, and flange with pins spaced 6 inches o.c.

Board Insulation Installation on Ducts and Plenums:  Secure with adhesive and insulation pins.

In first subparagraph below, many manufacturers do not recommend 100 percent coverage of adhesive because of the effect on the overall insulation system's fire-performance characteristics.  Verify application coverage recommendations with insulation manufacturer.

Apply adhesives according to manufacturer's recommended coverage rates per unit area, for 100 percent coverage of duct and plenum surfaces.

Revise first subparagraph below to allow adhesive to be omitted from top surface of horizontal rectangular ducts.

Apply adhesive to entire circumference of ducts and to all surfaces of fittings and transitions.

Install either capacitor-discharge-weld pins and speed washers or cupped-head, capacitor-discharge-weld pins on sides and bottom of horizontal ducts and sides of vertical ducts as follows:

On duct sides with dimensions 18 inches and smaller, place pins along longitudinal centerline of duct.  Space 3 inches maximum from insulation end joints, and 16 inches o.c.

On duct sides with dimensions larger than 18 inches, space pins 16 inches o.c. each way, and 3 inches maximum from insulation joints.  Install additional pins to hold insulation tightly against surface at cross bracing.

Pins may be omitted from top surface of horizontal, rectangular ducts and plenums.

Do not overcompress insulation during installation.

Cut excess portion of pins extending beyond speed washers or bend parallel with insulation surface.  Cover exposed pins and washers with tape matching insulation facing.

For ducts and plenums with surface temperatures below ambient, install a continuous unbroken vapor barrier.  Create a facing lap for longitudinal seams and end joints with insulation by removing 2 inches from one edge and one end of insulation segment.  Secure laps to adjacent insulation section with 1/2-inch outward-clinching staples, 1 inch o.c.  Install vapor barrier consisting of factory- or field-applied jacket, adhesive, vapor-barrier mastic, and sealant at joints, seams, and protrusions.

Repair punctures, tears, and penetrations with tape or mastic to maintain vapor-barrier seal.

Install vapor stops for ductwork and plenums operating below 50 deg F at 18-foot intervals.  Vapor stops shall consist of vapor-barrier mastic applied in a Z-shaped pattern over insulation face, along butt end of insulation, and over the surface.  Cover insulation face and surface to be insulated a width equal to two times the insulation thickness, but not less than 3 inches.

Install insulation on rectangular duct elbows and transitions with a full insulation section for each surface.  Groove and score insulation to fit as closely as possible to outside and inside radius of elbows.  Install insulation on round and flat-oval duct elbows with individually mitered gores cut to fit the elbow.

Insulate duct stiffeners, hangers, and flanges that protrude beyond insulation surface with 6-inch- wide strips of same material used to insulate duct.  Secure on alternating sides of stiffener, hanger, and flange with pins spaced 6 inches o.c.

FIELD-APPLIED JACKET INSTALLATION

Where FSK jackets are indicated, install as follows:

Draw jacket material smooth and tight.

Install lap or joint strips with same material as jacket.

Secure jacket to insulation with manufacturer's recommended adhesive.

Install jacket with 1-1/2-inch laps at longitudinal seams and 3-inch- wide joint strips at end joints.

Seal openings, punctures, and breaks in vapor-retarder jackets and exposed insulation with vapor-barrier mastic.

Where metal jackets are indicated, install with 2-inch overlap at longitudinal seams and end joints.  Overlap longitudinal seams arranged to shed water.  Seal end joints with weatherproof sealant recommended by insulation manufacturer.  Secure jacket with stainless-steel bands 12 inches o.c. and at end joints.

FIRE-RATED INSULATION SYSTEM INSTALLATION

Where fire-rated insulation system is indicated, secure system to ducts and duct hangers and supports to maintain a continuous fire rating.

Insulate duct access panels and doors to achieve same fire rating as duct.

Install firestopping at penetrations through fire-rated assemblies.  Fire-stop systems are specified in Section 078413 "Penetration Firestopping."

FINISHES

Insulation with ASJ, Glass-Cloth, or Other Paintable Jacket Material:  Paint jacket with paint system identified below and as specified in Section 099113 "Exterior Painting" and Section 099123 "Interior Painting."

Flat Acrylic Finish:  Two finish coats over a primer that is compatible with jacket material and finish coat paint.  Add fungicidal agent to render fabric mildew proof.

Finish Coat Material:  Interior, flat, latex-emulsion size.

Flexible Elastomeric Thermal Insulation:  After adhesive has fully cured, apply two coats of insulation manufacturer's recommended protective coating.

Color:  Final color as selected by Architect.  Vary first and second coats to allow visual inspection of the completed Work.

Do not field paint aluminum or stainless-steel jackets.

FIELD QUALITY CONTROL

Testing Agency:  Engage a qualified testing agency to perform tests and inspections.

Perform tests and inspections.

Tests and Inspections:

Inspect ductwork, randomly selected by Architect, by removing field-applied jacket and insulation in layers in reverse order of their installation.  Extent of inspection shall be limited to one location for each duct system defined in the "Duct Insulation Schedule, General" Article.

See Section 014000 "Quality Requirements" for retesting and reinspecting requirements and Section 017300 "Execution" for requirements for correcting the Work.

All insulation applications will be considered defective Work if sample inspection reveals noncompliance with requirements.

DUCT INSULATION SCHEDULE, GENERAL

Plenums and Ducts Requiring Insulation:

Indoor, concealed supply and outdoor air.

Indoor, exposed supply and outdoor air.

Indoor, concealed return located in unconditioned space.

Indoor, exposed return located in unconditioned space.

Indoor, concealed, Type I, commercial, kitchen hood exhaust.

Indoor, exposed, Type I, commercial, kitchen hood exhaust.

Indoor, concealed oven and warewash exhaust.

Indoor, exposed oven and warewash exhaust.

Outdoor, concealed supply and return.

Outdoor, exposed supply and return.

Items Not Insulated:

Fibrous-glass ducts.

Metal ducts with duct liner of sufficient thickness to comply with energy code and ASHRAE/IESNA 90.1.

Factory-insulated flexible ducts.

Factory-insulated plenums and casings.

Flexible connectors.

Vibration-control devices.

Factory-insulated access panels and doors.

Duct and plenum insulation schedules in first two articles below specify commonly used insulation materials and thicknesses for each service type.  LEED Prerequisite EA 2 requires that duct insulation R-value comply with ASHRAE/IESNA 90.1 tables titled "Minimum Duct Insulation R-Value, Cooling and Heating Only Supply Ducts and Return Ducts" and "Minimum Duct Insulation R-Value, Combined Heating and Cooling Supply Ducts and Return Ducts."  Not all materials and thicknesses may be suitable for a specific project.  Revise to suit Project after considering all parameters that impact selection.  Do not duplicate requirements inserted in "Insulation Materials" Article.  See Evaluations for more information and guidance.

INDOOR DUCT AND PLENUM INSULATION SCHEDULE

Concealed, supply-air duct and plenum insulation shall be one of the following:

Mineral-Fiber Blanket:  1-1/2 inches thick and 0.75-lb/cu. Ft. nominal density.

Mineral-Fiber Board:  1-1/2 inches thick and 3.0-lb/cu. Ft. nominal density.

Concealed, return-air duct and plenum insulation shall be one of the following:

Mineral-Fiber Blanket:  1-1/2 inches thick and 0.75-lb/cu. Ft. nominal density.

Mineral-Fiber Board:  1-1/2 inches thick and 3.0-lb/cu. Ft. nominal density.

Concealed, outdoor-air duct and plenum insulation shall be one of the following:

Mineral-Fiber Blanket:  1-1/2 inches thick and 0.75-lb/cu. Ft. nominal density.

Mineral-Fiber Board:  1-1/2 inches thick and 3.0-lb/cu. Ft. nominal density.

Concealed, Type I, Commercial, Kitchen Hood Exhaust Duct and Plenum Insulation:  Fire-rated blanket or board; thickness as required to achieve 2-hour fire rating.

Exposed, supply-air duct and plenum insulation shall be the following:

Internally lined per Section 233113 “Metal Ducts.”

Exposed, return-air duct and plenum insulation shall be the following:

Internally lined per Section 233113 “Metal Ducts.”

Exposed, outdoor-air duct and plenum insulation shall be the following:

Internally lined per Section 233113 “Metal Ducts.”

Exposed, Type I, Commercial, Kitchen Hood Exhaust Duct and Plenum Insulation:  Fire-rated blanket or board; thickness as required to achieve 2-hour fire rating.

ABOVEGROUND, OUTDOOR DUCT AND PLENUM INSULATION SCHEDULE

Outdoor, supply-air duct and plenum insulation shall be the following:

Internally lined per Section 233113 “Metal Ducts.”

Outdoor, return-air duct and plenum insulation shall be the following:

Internally lined per Section 233113 “Metal Ducts.”

Outdoor, outdoor-air duct and plenum insulation shall be the following:

Internally lined per Section 233113 “Metal Ducts.”

END OF SECTION 230713